Project Gutenberg's The Luck of Thirteen, by Jan Gordon
Cora J. Gordon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Luck of Thirteen
       Wanderings and Flight through Montenegro and Serbia

Author: Jan Gordon
Cora J. Gordon

Release Date: December 12, 2005 [EBook #17291]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LUCK OF THIRTEEN ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Taavi Kalju and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net. (This file was made using scans of
public domain works from the University of Michigan Digital
Libraries.)







[Illustration: JO AT THE MACHINE GUN.]




THE LUCK OF THIRTEEN

WANDERINGS AND FLIGHT THROUGH MONTENEGRO AND SERBIA

BY

MR. AND MRS. JAN GORDON


WITH PHOTOGRAPHS AND A MAP
TAIL PIECES BY CORA J. GORDON
COLOUR PLATES BY JAN GORDON


NEW YORK
E.P. DUTTON AND COMPANY
681 FIFTH AVENUE
1916


PRINTED BY
WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED
LONDON AND BECCLES, ENGLAND




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                            PAGE

        INTRODUCTION                                  1

    II. NISH AND SALONIKA                            10

   III. OFF TO MONTENEGRO                            20

    IV. ACROSS THE FRONTIER                          31

     V. THE MONTENEGRIN FRONT ON THE DRINA           47

    VI. NORTHERN MONTENEGRO                          66

   VII. TO CETTINJE                                  85

  VIII. THE LAKE OF SCUTARI                          99

    IX. SCUTARI                                     105

     X. THE HIGHWAY OF MONTENEGRO                   122

    XI. IPEK, DECHANI AND A HAREM                   145

   XII. THE HIGHWAY OF MONTENEGRO--II               169

  XIII. USKUB                                       182

   XIV. MAINLY RETROSPECTIVE                        198

    XV. SOME PAGES FROM MR. GORDON'S DIARY          213

   XVI. LAST DAYS AT VRNTZE                         227

  XVII. KRALIEVO                                    244

 XVIII. THE FLIGHT OF SERBIA                        263

   XIX. NOVI BAZAR                                  284

    XX. THE UNKNOWN ROAD                            299

   XXI. THE FLEA-PIT                                315

  XXII. ANDRIEVITZA TO POD                          328

 XXIII. INTO ALBANIA                                341

  XXIV. "ONE MORE RIBBER TO CROSS"                  359

        INDEX                                       377




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


               COLOURED PLATES

                                                  FACING PAGE

Jo at the Machine Gun                          _Frontispiece_

The Ipek Pass in Winter                                   140

Retreating Ammunition Train                               276

Albanian Mule-drivers Camping                             354


               HALF-TONE PLATES

Out-patients                                                4

Shoeing Bullocks                                            4

Peasant Women in Gala Costume, Nish                        20

Serb Convalescents at Uzhitze                              28

Serb and Montenegrin Officers on the Drina                 58

A Concealed Gun Emplacement on the Drina                   58

Peasant Women of the Mountains                             76

A Village of North Montenegro                              76

Jo and Mr. Suma in the Scutari Bazaar                     110

Christian Women hiding from the Photographer              112

Scutari--Bazaar and Old Venetian Fortress                 112

Disembarkation of a Turkish Bride                         114

Governor Petrovitch and his Daughter in their State Barge 114

In the Bazaar of Ipek                                     162

Street Coffee Seller in Ipek                              162

A Wine Market in Uskub                                    184

Big Gun passing through Krusevatz                         194

In-patients                                               202

Broken Aeroplane in the Arsenal at Krag                   220

Where the "Plane" fell                                    220

House near the Arsenal damaged by Bombs                   220

Peasant Women leaving their Village                       260

Serb Family by the Roadside                               260

The Flight of Serbia                                      266

Unloading the _Benedetto_, San Giovanni di Medua          364

Route Map of the Authors' Wanderings         _At end of text_




THE LUCK OF THIRTEEN




INTRODUCTION


It is curious to follow anything right back to its inception, and to
discover from what extraordinary causes results are due. It is strange,
for instance, to find that the luck of the thirteen began right back at
the time when Jan, motoring back from Uzhitze down the valley of the
Morava, coming fastish round a corner, plumped right up to the axle in a
slough of clinging wet sandy mud. The car almost shrugged its shoulders
as it settled down, and would have said, if cars could speak, "Well,
what are you going to do about that, eh?" It was about the 264th mud
hole in which Jan's motor had stuck, and we sat down to wait for the
inevitable bullocks. But it was a Sunday and bullocks were few; the wait
became tedious, and in the intervals of thought which alternated with
the intervals of exasperation, Jan realized that he needed a holiday.

To be explicit. Jan was acting as engineer to Dr. Berry's Serbian
Mission from the Royal Free Hospital:--Jan Gordon, and Jo is his wife,
Cora Josephine Gordon, artist, and V.A.D.

We had a six months of work behind us. We had seen the typhus, and had
dodged the dreaded louse who carries the infection, we had seen the
typhus dwindle and die with the onrush of summer. We had helped to clean
and prepare six hospitals at Vrntze or Vrnjatchka Banja--whichever you
prefer. We had helped Mr. Berry, the great surgeon, to ventilate his
hospitals by smashing the windows--one had been a child again for a
moment. Jo had learned Serbian and was assisting Dr. Helen Boyle, the
Brighton mind specialist, to run a large and flourishing out-patient
department to which tuberculosis and diphtheria--two scourges of
Serbia--came in their shoals. We had endeavoured to ward off typhoid by
initiating a sort of sanitary vigilance committee, having first sacked
the chief of police: we had laid drains, which the chief Serbian
engineer said he would pull up as soon as we had gone away. We had
helped in the plans of a very necessary slaughter-house, which Mr. Berry
was going to present to the town. There was an excuse for Jan's desire.
The English papers had been howling about the typhus months after the
disease had been chased out by English, French, and American doctors,
who had disinfected the country till it reeked of formalin and sulphur;
shoals of devoted Englishwomen were still pouring over, generously ready
to risk their lives in a danger which no longer existed. Our own unit,
which had dwindled to a comfortable--almost a family--number, with Mr.
Berry as father, had been suddenly enlarged by an addition of ten. These
ten complicated things, they all naturally wanted work, and we had
cornered all the jobs.

So, after the fatigues of February, March, and April, and the heat of
June, Jan quite decided on that Uzhitze mud patch that a holiday would
do little harm to himself, and good to everybody else. Then, however,
came the problem of Jo. Jo is a socialistic sort of a person with
conservative instincts. She has the feminine ability to get her wheels
on a rail and run comfortably along till Jan appears like a big railway
accident and throws the scenery about; but once the resolution
accomplished she pursues the idea with a determination and ferocity
which leaves Jan far in the background.

Jo had her out-patient department. Every morning, wet or fine, crowds of
picturesque peasants would gather about the little side door of our
hospital, women in blazing coloured hand-woven skirts, like Joseph's
coat, children in unimaginable rags, but with the inevitable belt
tightly bound about their little stomachs, men covered with tuberculous
sores and so forth, on some days as many as a hundred. Jo, having
finished breakfast, had then to assume a commanding air, and to stamp
down the steps into the crowd, sort out the probable diphtheria
cases--this by long practice,--forbid anybody to approach them under
pain of instant disease, get the others into a vague theatre queue,
which they never kept, and then run back into the office to assist the
doctor and to translate. All this, repeated daily, was highly
interesting of course, and so when Jan suggested the tour she "didn't
want to do it."

But authority was on Jan's side. Jo had had a mild accident: a
diphtheria patient fled to avoid being doctored, they often did, and Jo
had chased after her; she tripped, fell, drove her teeth through her
lower lip, and for a moment was stunned. When they caught the patient
they found that it was the wrong person--but that is beside the subject.
Dr. Boyle thought that Jo had had a mild concussion and threw her weight
at Jan's side. Dr. Berry was quite agreeable, and gave us a commission
to go to Salonika to start with and find a disinfector which had gone
astray. Another interpreter was found, so Jo took leave of her
out-patients.

       *       *       *       *       *

In Serbia it was necessary to get permission to move. Jan went to the
major for the papers. There were crowds of people on the major's
steps, and Jan learned that all the peasants and loafers had been
called in to certify, so that nobody should avoid their military
service. Later we parted, taking two knapsacks. Dr. Boyle and Miss
Dickenson were very generous, giving us large supplies of chocolate,
Brand's essence, and corned beef for our travels, and we had two boxes
of "compressed luncheons," black horrible-looking gluey tabloids which
claim to be soup, fish, meat, vegetables and pudding in one swallow.

[Illustration: OUT-PATIENTS.]

[Illustration: SHOEING BULLOCKS.]

The Austrian prisoners bade us a sad farewell, but many friends
accompanied us to the station, and the rotund major and his rounder wife
did us the like honour. Our major was a queer mixture: he was jolly
because he was fat, and he was stern because he had a beaky nose, and in
any interview one had first to ascertain whether the stomach or the nose
held the upper hand, so to speak. With the wife one was always sure--she
had a snub nose. On this occasion the major furiously boxed the Austrian
prisoner coachman's ears, telling us that he was the best he had ever
had. The unfortunate driver was a picture of rueful pleasure. The two
plump dears stood waving four plump hands till we had rumbled round the
corner of the landscape.

In the train to Nish it was intensely hot. We had sixteen or seventeen
fellow-passengers in our third-class wooden-seated carriage--all the
firsts had been removed, because they could not be disinfected--and the
windows, with the exception of two, had been screwed tightly down. Every
time we stood up to look at the landscape somebody slipped into our
seat, and we were continually sitting down into unexpected laps.
Expostulations, apologies, and so on. Somebody had gnawed a piece from
one of the wheels, and we lurched through the scenery with a banging
metallic clangour which made conversation difficult, in spite of which
Jo astonished the natives by her colloquial and fluent Serbian. We had
an enormous director of a sanitary department and a plump wife,
evidently risen, but fat people rise in Serbia automatically like
balloons. We had three meagre old gentlemen, one unshaven for a week,
one whiskered since twenty years with Piccadilly weepers like a stage
butler; some ultra fashionable girls and men; and a dear old dumb woman
wearing three belts, who had been a former outpatient; and several
sticky families of children.

The old gentlemen took a huge interest in Jo. They drew her out in
Serbian, and at every sentence turned each to the other and elevated
their hands, ejaculating "kako!" (how!) in varying terms of admiration
and flattery.

The American has not yet ousted the Turk from Serbia, and the bite from
our wheel banged off the revolutions of our sedate passing. Trsternik's
church--modern but good taste--gleamed like a jewel in the sun against
the dark hills. On either hand were maize fields with stalks as tall as
a man, their feathery tops veiling the intense green of the herbage with
a film, russet like cobwebs spun in the setting sun. There were plum
orchards--for the manufacture of plum brandy--so thick with fruit that
there was more purple than green in the branches, and between the trunks
showed square white ruddy-roofed hovels with great squat tile-decked
chimneys. Some of the houses were painted with decorations of bright
colours, vases of flowers or soldiers, and on one was a detachment of
crudely drawn horsemen, dark on the white walls, meant to represent the
heroes of old Serbian poetry.

To Krusevatz the valley broadened, and the sinking sun tinted the
widening maize-tops till the fields were great squares of gold. We had
no lights in the train, and presently dusk closed down, seeming to shut
each up within his or her own mind. The hills grew very dark and
distant, and on the faint rising mist the trees seemed to stand about
with their hands in their pockets like vegetable Charlie Chaplins.

A junction, and a rush for tables at the little out-of-door restaurant.
In the country from which we have just come all seemed peace, but here
in truth was war. Passing shadowy in the faint lights were soldiers;
soldiers crouched in heaps in the dark corners of the station; yet more
soldiers and soldiers again huddled in great square box trucks or open
waggons waiting patiently for the train which was four or five hours
late. There were women with them, wives or sisters or daughters, with
great heavy knapsacks and stolid unexpressive faces.

While we were dreaming of this romance of war, and of the coming romance
of our own tour, a little man dumped himself at our table, explained
that he had a pain in his kidneys, and started an interminable story
about his wife and a dog. He was Jan's devoted admirer, and declared
that Jan had performed a successful operation upon him, though Jan is no
surgeon, and had never set eyes upon the man before.

Georgevitch rescued us. Georgevitch was fat, tall, young and genial, and
was military storekeeper at Vrntze. He was an ideal storekeeper and
looked the part, but he had been a comitaj. He had roamed the country
with belts full of bombs and holsters full of pistols, he and 189
others, with two loaves of bread per man and then "Ever Forwards." Of
the 189 others only 22 were left, and one was a patient at our hospital
where we called him the "Velika Dete" or "big child," because of his
sensibility. With Georgevitch was a dark woman with keen sparkling eyes.
Alone, this woman had run the typhus barracks in Vrntze until the
arrival of the English missions. She was a Montenegrin; no Serbian woman
could be found courageous enough to undertake the task. After struggling
all the winter, she was taken ill about a fortnight after the arrival of
the English. The Red Cross Mission took care of her and she recovered.

We left our bore still talking about his wife and the dog, and fled to
their table, where we chatted till our train arrived. We found a
coupé--a carriage with only one long seat--the exigencies of which
compelled Jan to be all night with Jo's boots on his face, and we so
slept as well as we were able.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER II

NISH AND SALONIKA


To our dismay a rare thing happened--our train was punctual, and we
arrived in Nish at four o'clock. It was cold and misty. The station was
desolate and the town asleep. Around us in the courtyard ragged soldiers
were lying with their heads pillowed on brightly striped bags. A nice
old woman who had asked Jo how old she was, what relation Jan was to
her, whether they had children, and where she had learnt Serbian,
suddenly lost all her interest in us and hurried off with voluble
friends whose enormous plaits around their flat red caps betokened the
respectable middle-class women.

Piccadilly weepers vanished and a depressed little quartet was left on
the platform--our two selves, a lean schoolmaster, and an egg-shaped man
who never spoke a word. We found a clerk sitting in an office. He said
we could not leave our bags in his room, but as we made him own that we
could not put them anywhere else he looked the other way while we
dropped them in the corner.

In the faint mist of the early morning the great overgrown village of
one-storied houses seemed like a real town buried up to its attics in
fog. We found a café which was shut, and sat waiting on green chairs
outside. Around us old men were talking of the news in the papers. They
said that Bulgaria was making territorial demands, and as the Balkan
governments covet land above all things they felt pessimistic as to
whether Serbia would concede anything, and said, shaking their heads,
"It will be another Belgium."

We celebrated the opening of the café by ordering five Turkish coffees
each, and the schoolmaster and we alternately stood treat. Jo loaded up
with aspirin to deaden a toothache which was worrying her.

We spent a cynical morning in interviews with people who were supposed
to know about missing luggage. Both they and we were aware that the
first hospital which got a wandering packing-case froze on to it, and if
inconvenient people came to hunt for their property the dismayed and
guilty ones hurriedly painted the case, saying to each other, "After all
it's in a good cause, and it's better than if it were stolen."

Then we went to see the powers who can say "no" to those who want to do
pleasant things, and were handed an amendment to a plea for a tour round
Serbia, including the front, which we had sent to them and which had
been pigeon-holed for a month.

"But we don't want to see a lot of monasteries," said Jan, as he gazed
at a little circle drawn round the over-visited part of Serbia. The
powers were adamant and seemed to think they had done very well for us.
We went away sadly, for monasteries had not been the idea at all.

Half an hour later we were pursuing an entirely different object. We had
discovered that Sir Ralph Paget was housing about £1000 worth of stores
destined for Dr. Clemow's hospital--which was in Montenegro--and which
needed an escort. He was somewhat puzzled at our altruistic anxiety to
take them off his hands, but was much relieved at the thought that he
could get rid of them.

We hurried to the station, rescued our knapsacks under the nose of a new
official who looked very much surprised, and boarded the English rest
house near by. English people were sitting in deck chairs outside the
papier-maché house which stood surrounded by a couple of tents and a
wooden kitchen in a field. Austrian prisoners were preparing lunch, and
we were introduced to Seemitch the dog.

Though young, Seemitch was fat and exhibited signs of a much-varied
ancestry. The original Seemitch, an important Serb with long gold
teeth, was very indignant that a dog, and such a dog, should be called
after him, so Sir Ralph arranged that of the two other puppies one
should be called after him and the other after Mr. Hardinge his
secretary. Thus the man Seemitch's dignity was restored.

At the station, to our great joy, we met two American doctors from
Zaichar. One we had mourned for dead and were astonished to see him,
shadow-like, stiff-kneed, and sitting uncomfortably on a chair in the
middle of the platform. Months before he had pricked himself with a
needle while operating on a gangrenous case, and had since lain
unconscious with blood-poisoning.

While we were cheering over his recovery, a little Frenchman slipped
into our reserved compartment, which was only a coupé, and had seized
the window seat. Jan found him lubricating his mouth, already full of
dinner, with wine from a bottle. As he showed no signs of seeing reason
from the male, Jo tried feminine indignation. "That seat is mine," she
snapped to his back-tilted head.

"Good. I exact nothing," he said, wiping his moustache upwards. She
suggested that if any exacting was to be done she possessed the
exclusive rights.

"Quel pays," he answered. Jo thought he was casting aspersions on
England and on her as the nearest representative, and the air became
distinctly peppery. The Frenchman hurriedly explained that he was
alluding to Serbia, so they buried the hatchet and became acquaintances.

       *       *       *       *       *

Uskub, or Skoplje, and one hour to wait. All about the great plains the
mountains were just growing ruddy with the dawn, and we gulped boiling
coffee at the station restaurant.

One of the American doctors seemed restless. Some one had told him it
was advisable to keep an eye on the luggage. They began to shunt the
train, and soon he was stumbling about the sidings in a resolute attempt
not to lose sight of the luggage van. We sympathetically wished him good
luck and walked past into the Turkish quarter, adopted by two dogs which
followed us all the way. We had a hurried glimpse of queer-shaped,
many-coloured houses, trousered women, and a general Turkishness.

We returned to find our American friend furious, full of the superior
methods of luggage registration in the States.

We had beer with him at the frontier, delicious cool stuff with a
mollifying influence. He told us he held the record for one month's
hernia operations in Serbia. We were later to meet his rival, a Canadian
doctor, in Montenegro.

Locked in the train, we awaited the medical examination, and sat
feeling self-consciously healthy. At last the Greek doctor opened the
door, glanced at a knapsack, and vanished. We were certified healthy.

It was a beautiful dark blue night when we arrived at Salonika. Crowds
of people were dining at little tables which filled the streets off the
quay, in spite of the awful smells which came up from the harbour.

It is impossible to sleep late in Salonika. Soon after dawn children
possess the town--bootblacks, paper-sellers, perambulating drapers'
shops; all children crying their wares noisily. The only commodity that
the children don't peddle is undertaken by mules laden with glass
fronted cases hanging on each side and which are filled with meat.

We breakfasted in the street, revelling in the early morning and shooing
away the children, who never gave us a moment's grace. In self-defence
we had our boots blacked, for the ambulating bootblack molests no longer
the owner of a well-polished pair of boots. It is queer to walk about in
a town where one-third of the population is only pecuniarily interested
in the momentary appearance of feet and never look at a face, like the
man with the muckrake with eyes glued on life as it is led two inches
from the ground.

When we had finished searching for disinfectors and dentists we
wandered up the hill through the romantic streets. Jan sketched busily,
but toothache had rather sapped Jo's industry, and she generally found
some large stone to sit on, whence to contemplate.

An old woman's face, peering round the doorway, discovered her sitting
on the doorstep, a Greek dustman gazing stupidly at her.

In two minutes they were talking hard. The old woman was a Bulgarian,
but they were able to understand each other. What Jo told the old woman
was translated to the dustman, and when Jan came up they were introduced
each to the other, the dustman with his broom bowing to the ground like
some old-time court usher.

Once a Greek woman offered a chair to Jo. She was much embarrassed, as
the only Greek words she had picked up were "How much?" and "Yet
another;" and as both seemed unsuitable she tried to put her gratitude
into the width of her smile.

We scrambled on ever afterwards through streets which were more like
cliff climbs than roads. The sun grew red till all Salonika lay at our
feet a maze of magenta shadow. We sat down in an old Turkish cemetery,
where we could watch the old wall sliding down to plains of gold, where,
falling into ruins, it lent its degraded stones for the construction of
Turkish hovels.

A kitten with paralysed hind legs crawled up to us and accepted a little
rubbing. When dusk came we moved on, marvelling at the inexhaustible
picturesqueness of Salonika.

As we clambered down the breakneck paths, the priests were illuminating
the minarets with hundreds of twinkling lights.

The next day was the Feast. Mahommedans were everywhere. By the women's
trousers, which twinkled beneath the shrouding veils, one could see that
they were gorgeously dressed. Befezzed men were lounging and smoking in
all the café's.

In the evening once more we wandered up through the old Turkish quarter.
We heard a curious noise like a hymn played by bagpipes, rhythmically
accompanied in syncopation by a very flabby drum. Round the corner came
four jolly niggers blowing pipes, and the drummer behind them. Very slim
young men with bright sashes and light trousers were twisting,
posturing, and dancing joyfully. One of them threw to Jo the most
graceful kiss she had ever seen.

We left Salonika in the morning, having been wakened by new sounds.
Thousands of marching feet, songs. This was puzzling.

In the train a young Greek told us that his nation had mobilized against
the Bulgars, but that it was not very serious. He said that there had
been very friendly feeling in Greece for England, but that we had done
our best to kill it.

"You see, monsieur," he explained, "your offer to give away our land. It
is not yours to give. You say that does not matter, but that colonies,
great colonies in Africa will replace the small part of land that we may
surrender. Kavalla is more valuable to Grecian hearts than all Africa,
for how could we desert our Grecian brothers and place them beneath the
rule of the Turk or Bulgar?"

On the train were more American doctors. One had just arrived, and was
still full of enthusiasm for scenery and sanitation. Also there was
Princess ---- surrounded by packing cases. Some months earlier she had
visited our hospitals in Vrntze and she had asked if one of our V.A.D.'s
could be sent to her as housemaid. Seeing her in the station, Jo
involuntarily ran over in her mind, was she "sober, honest and
obliging?"

The American doctors and we picnicked together. We ate bully beef and a
huge water melon. The heat was awful. The velvet seats seemed to invade
one's body and come through at the other side. One of the doctors sat on
the step of the train, and Jo found him nodding and smiling as he
dreamt. She rescued him before he fell off.

After twelve hours they left us. Uskub once more and an hour to wait. We
sat behind trees in boxes on the platform and ate omelet with a nice
old Jew and his ten-year-old daughter, who already spoke five languages.

Then to sleep. We found our half coupé contained a second seat which
could be pulled down, so we each had a bed. At four in the morning we
were awakened by the most awful imitation of a German band.

What had happened? We looked out. It was barely dawn, and a wretched
little orchestra was grouped at the edge of the tiny station. Every
instrument was cracked and was tuned one-sixteenth tone different from
its companions. What it lacked in musical ability it made up in energy.

Why, oh, _why_ at that hour, we never found out. Perhaps it was in
honour of the Princess, poor lady!

[Illustration]




CHAPTER III

OFF TO MONTENEGRO


Back to Nish in the rain, and Jo was wearing a cotton frock. There may
be more dismal towns than this Nish, but I have yet to see them, and
this, although the great squares were packed with gaily coloured
peasants--some feast, we imagined--carts full of melons, melons on the
ground, melons framing the faces of the greedy--cerise green-rind moons
projecting from either cheek. The Montenegrin consul was not at home, so
off we went to the Foreign Office to give a letter to Mr. Grouitch, who
sent us to the Sanitary Department of the War Office (henceforth known
as S.D.W.O.). S.D.W.O. wouldn't move without a letter from "Sir Paget."
We got the letter from "Sir Paget" and back to the S.D.W.O., to find it
shut in our faces, and to learn that it did not reopen till four.

Then came the matter of Jo's tooth. This abscess had been nagging all
the time, it had vigorously tried to get between Jo and the scenery. We
had sought dentists in Salonika, rejecting one because his hall was too
dirty, a second because she (yes, a she) was practising on her father's
certificates, the third, a little Spaniard, had red-hot pokered the
gums thereof and only annoyed it. But we had heard there was a Russian
dentist in Nish, a very good one. The Russian dentist turned out to be a
girl, and tiny--she spoke no Serb, but Jo managed, by means of the
second cousinship of the language, to make out what she said in Russian.

[Illustration: PEASANT WOMEN IN GALA COSTUME--NISH.]

"The tooth must come out," squeaked the small dentist.

"Can't you save it?" prayed Jo; "it's the best one I've got, and the one
to which I send all the Serbian meat."

"It must come out," squeaked the Russ.

"Can't you save it?" prayed Jo.

"It must come out," reiterated the Russ.

"You're very small," said Jo, doubtfully.

This annoyed the dentist. She pushed unwilling Jo into a chair, produced
a pair of pincers, and, oh, woe! she wrenched to the north, she wrenched
to the south, she wrenched to the east, and there was the tooth, nearly
as big as the dentist herself.

"I never can eat Serbian meat again," murmured Jo as she mopped her
mouth.

After tea we returned to the S.D.W.O., and by means of our letter and
our Englishness we got in front of all the unfortunate people who had
been waiting for hours, and received our passes, etc., immediately.

Sir Ralph Paget's storekeeper wouldn't work on Sunday, so we had also
to rest, and we celebrated by staying in bed late and going for a walk
in the afternoon with an Englishman who was _en route_ for Sofia. We
came to a little village where every house was surrounded by high walls
made of wattle. The women soon crowded round, imagining Mr. B---- a
doctor. Jo pretended to translate, and gave advice for a girl with
consumption, and an old woman whose hand was stiff from typhus, and we
had to give the money for the latter's unguent. For the consumptive she
said, "Open the windows, rest, and don't spit"; but that isn't a
peasant's idea of doctoring: they want medicine or magic, one or the
other, which doesn't matter.

The train started "after eight" on Monday evening. The English boys at
the Rest house were very good to us, adding to our small stock of
necessities a "Tommy's treasure," two mackintosh capes, and some oxo
cubes. One youth said, "You won't want to travel a second time on a
Serbian luggage train"; then ruefully, "I've done it! The shunting,
phew!"

A Serbian railway station is a public meeting-place; along the platform,
but railed off from the train, is a restaurant which is one of the
favourite cafés of the town. It is such fun to the still childish
Serbian mind to sit sipping beer or wine and watch the trains run about,
and hear the whistles. We had our supper amongst the gay crowd, and
then pushed out into the darkened goods station to find our travelling
bedroom, for we were to sleep in the waggons--beds and mattresses having
been provided--and we had borrowed blankets from the Rest house.

We found our truck and climbed in. There were certainly beds enough, for
there were thirty light iron folding bedsteads piled up at one end. We
chose two, and, not satisfied with the stacking of the others, Jan
repiled them, with an eye on what our friend had said about Serbian
shunting. Even then Jo was not happy about them.

We sat on our beds, reading or staring out of our open door at the
twinkle of the station lights, the moving flares of the engines, and the
fountains of sparks which rushed from their chimneys; listening to the
chains of bumps which denoted a shunting train. We heard another chain
of bumps, which rattled rapidly towards us and suddenly--a most awful
CRASH. The candle went out, and we were flung from bed on to the floor.
Our truck hurtled down the line at about thirty miles an hour, and
suddenly struck some solid object. Another wild crash, and the whole
twenty-eight beds flung themselves upon the place where we had been, and
smashed our couches to the ground.

We have read stories of the Spanish Inquisition about rooms which grow
smaller, and at last crush the unfortunate victim to a jelly: we can
now appreciate the feeling of the unfortunate victim aforesaid. There
were piles of packing-cases at either end of the van, and for the next
hour, as we were hurtled up and down by the Serbian engine-driver, at
each crash these packing-cases crept nearer and nearer. The beds had
fallen across the door, so it was impossible to escape. When the lower
cases had reached the beds they halted, but the upper ones still crept
on towards us. In the short, wild intervals of peace Jan tried to push
the cases back and restore momentary stability. In addition to
diminishing room, we were flung about with every crash, landing on the
corner of a packing-case, on the edge of an iron bedstead, and with each
crash the light went out. We will give not one jot of advantage to your
prisoner in the Spanish Inquisition, save that we escaped whereas he did
not.

The engine-driver tired of the sport just in time to save our limbs, if
not lives, and he dragged the train out of the station into the dark.

At Krusevatch we halted for the next day. After a discussion with the
station-master, who asked us to come down first at six p.m., then at
four, then at one, and lastly in two hours, at nine a.m. we strolled up
towards the town. There was an old beggar on the road, and he was
cuddling a "goosla," or Serbian one-stringed fiddle, which sounds not
unlike a hive of bees in summer-time, and is played not with the tips of
the fingers, as a violin, but with the fat part of the first phalanx. As
soon as he heard our footsteps he began to howl, and to saw at his
miserable instrument; and as soon as he had received our contribution he
stopped suddenly. We were worth no more effort; but we admired his
frankness.

Krusevatz market-place is like the setting of a Serbian opera. The
houses are the kind of houses that occupy the back scenery of opera, and
in the middle is an abominable statue commemorating something, which is
just in the bad taste which would mar an opera setting. There was an old
man wandering about with two knapsacks, one on his back and one on his
chest, and from the orifice of each peered out innumerable ducks' heads.
We returned to the station at nine, but were told that nothing could be
done till one. So we went up to the churchyard, spread our mackintoshes,
and got a much-needed sleep. The church is very old, but isn't much to
look at, and we, being no archæologists, would sooner look at that of
Trsternick, though it is modern.

We returned to the station to unload our trucks, for at this point the
broad-gauge line ceases, and there is but a narrow-gauge into the
mountains. A band of Austrian prisoners were detailed to help us, and
they at once recognized us, and knew that we came from Vrntze. They were
in a wretched condition: their clothes were torn, they said that they
had no change of underclothes, and were swarming with vermin, nor could
they be cleaned, for they worked even on Sundays, and had no time to
wash their clothes. They begged us for soap, and asked us to send them a
change of raiment from Vrntze. We explained sadly that we were not going
back just yet, but we could oblige them with the soap, for a case had
been broken open, and the waggon was strewn with bars. We also gave some
to the engine-driver, as a bribe to shunt us gently.

We imagined that the soap had burst because of the shunting, but in our
second truck discovered that this same shunting had been strangely
selective. It had, for instance, opened a case of brandy, it had burst a
box of tinned tongue, and even opened some of the tins which were strewn
in the truck. And yet the truck had been sealed, both doors. Several
cases of biscuits, too, had been abstracted, and all this must have
happened under the very noses of the Englishmen who had supervised the
loading. Some of the prisoners said that they were starving, so we
distributed our spare crusts amongst them, and they ate them greedily
enough.

In the fields by the railway were queer pallid green plants which
puzzled us. They were like tall cabbages, and shone with a curious
ghostly intensity in the gloaming.

We dangled our feet over the side of our waggon watching the flitting
scenery. At one point we passed a train in which were other English
people, who stared amazed at us and waved their hands as we disappeared.
Dusk was down when we passed Vrntze, and we reached the gorges of Ovchar
in the dark. We thundered through tunnels and out over hanging
precipices, the river beneath us a faint band of greyish light in the
blackness of the mountains.

Uzhitze in the morning at 4.30; it was cold and wet. Jan wanted to hurry
off to the hotel, but Jo sensibly refused, and we settled down till a
decent hour.

The hotel was a huge room with a smaller yard; on the one side of the
yard were the kitchens, etc., and on the other a string of bedrooms. We
then crossed the big square to the Nachanlik's (or mayor's) office.

Outside the mayor's office we found an old friend. He had been a patient
in our hospital, and gangrene, following typhus, had so poisoned his
legs that both were amputated. He had been discharged the day before,
and had travelled up from Vrntze, some eight hours, in an open truck.
The Serbian authorities had brought him from the station and had propped
him on a wooden bench outside the mayor's office, where he had remained
all night, and where we found him. He was a charming fellow, though very
silent. Once when Jo had remarked upon this silence he had answered,
"When a man has no longer any legs it is fitting that he should be
silent."

He was waiting for his father, who lived twelve hours away in the
mountains. The old man came with a donkey, and there was a most
affecting meeting between the old father and his poor mutilated son.
Tears flowed freely on either side, for Serbs are still simple enough to
be unashamed of emotion. The donkey had an ordinary saddle, on to which
our friend was hoisted. He balanced tentatively for a moment, then shook
his head. A pack-saddle was substituted.

"It is hard," he said, "young enough, and yet like a useless bale of
goods."

Twenty hours he had endured, and yet had twelve to go--thirty-two hours
for a man without legs. This will show of what some Serbs are made.

Within the office we found a professor whom we had met before, and who
was acting as assistant mayor. We took him to the station and estimated
that thirty-two waggons would deal with our stuff.

[Illustration: SERB CONVALESCENTS AT UZHITZE.]

Jo and Jan went for a stroll, Uzhitze, especially in the back
streets, is like a Dürer etching--that one of the Prodigal Son, for
instance, all tiny, peaky-roofed houses. We took a siesta in the
afternoon, but Jan was dragged out to talk to our professor, who
explained that it was impossible for the Serbian Government to find
thirty-two ox-carts at once, so the convoy must make two journeys. He
also said that horses would be provided for us, and that we would take
two or three days to do the trip, but that the ox-waggons would be at
least seven, which was death to our romantic dream of toiling
laboriously up almost inaccessible mountains at the head of straining
ox-carts, sleeping by the roadside, brigands, and all that.

We went down to the station, unloaded the truck and checked the numbers.
A few were missing, but not so many as we had expected.

A regiment of soldiers were called up; at a word of command they pounced
upon our packing-cases and hurried them off to a storehouse. The smaller
cases were left to go on donkeys, two on either side.

The professor dined with us. He is an Anglophile, and was determined
after the war to go to England in order to discover the secret of her
greatness. He had a theory that it lay in our educational laws, which he
wanted to transplant into Serbia wholesale. Jan thought not, and
suggested that it might lie even deeper than that.

Next day was a Prazhnik, or feast day, and the great square was crowded
with peasantry in their beautiful hand-woven clothes. There were
soldiers straight back from the lines chaffing and flirting with the
pretty girls, and presently a group began to dance the "Kola" about a
man who played a pipe. It is not difficult to dance the Kola. You join
hands till a ring is formed, and then shuffle round and round. If you
have aspirations to style you fling your legs about as much as space
will allow, and we noticed how much better the men danced than the
girls, who were almost all very clumsy.

We were to be called at six, so went to bed early, and in spite of the
odours from the yard slept soundly.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IV

ACROSS THE FRONTIER


We got up in good time, breakfasted, but there was no sign of horses.
After waiting two hours a square man was brought up to us by the waiter
and introduced as our guide. The professor, who had promised to see us
off, was apparently clinging to his bed, for he did not come. Our guide
was a taciturn, loose-limbed fellow, but had nice eyes and a charming
manner; he helped us on to our horses, and off we went. Jan was rather
anxious at the start, for he had done very little riding since
childhood; but his horse was quiet, and soon he had persuaded himself
that he was a cavalier from birth. Jo was riding astride for the second
time in her life.

We took the road to Zlatibor (golden hill). There was a heavy mist, the
hills were just outlined in faint washes on the fog, and as we mounted
the zig-zag path, higher and higher, the town became small and fairylike
beneath us; and a soldiers' camp made a queer chessboard on the green of
the valley. Jo's horse cast a shoe almost at the start, but the guide
said that it did not matter. We went on and ever up, our horses
clambering like goats. The scenery was on the whole very English, and
not unlike the Devonshire side of Dartmoor.

Our guide took us a two mile detour to show us his house. Later we
reached a tiny village with a queer church. We off-saddled for a moment,
and were welcomed by the inhabitants, who gave us Turkish coffee and
plum brandy (rakia), while in exchange we made them cigarettes of
English tobacco. At sixteen kilometres we reached a larger village,
where we decided to lunch. We were astonished by the sudden appearance
of a French doctor. He was delighted to see us, more so when he found
that we both spoke French, and invited us to coffee. We lunched with our
guide at the local inn. We ordered pig; indeed there was nothing else to
order.

"How much?" said mine host.

"For three," answered we.

"But how much is that?" replied mine host. "You see, each man eats
differently." So we ordered one kilo to go on with.

Half a pig was wrenched from a spit in front of the big fire, carried
sizzling outside to the wood block, where the waiter hewed it apart with
the axe.

We had discovered peculiarities in our horses. They had conscientious
objections to going abreast, and always walked single file; this was
owing to the narrowness of the mountain paths. Jo's horse, which somehow
looked like Monkey Brand, insisted on taking the second place, and would
by no means go third. At last we reached the top of Zlatibor--which gets
its name from a peculiar golden cheese which it produces. The view is
like that from the Cat and Fiddle in Derbyshire, only bigger in scale,
and from thence the ride began to be interminable. It grew darker, we
walked down the hills to ease our aching knees, and Jan decided that
horse riding was no go.

Finally the guide decided that it was too late to reach Novi Varosh that
night, and so the direction was altered. The road grew stony and more
stony. A bitter breeze came up with the evening. We came to a green
valley, at the end of which was a rocky gorge, down which ran the
twistiest stream: it seemed as though it had been designed by a lump of
mercury on a wobbling plate. We turned from the gorge on to a hill so
rocky that the path was only visible where former horse-hoofs had
stained the stones with red earth.

The village consisted of an enormous school, a little church, soldiers
encamped round fires in the churchyard, and seven or eight wooden
hovels. Our guide stopped at the door of the dirtiest and rapped. A
furtive woman's face peered out into the gloom. We climbed painfully
from our saddles, for we had been thirteen hours on the road.

"Beds?" said the guide to the woman.

"Good Lord!" thought we.

She shook her head dolefully and said, "Ima," which means "there is."
Serbians nod for no. The woman slid out into the night and passed to
another building, climbed the stairs to a veranda and disappeared.

It grew colder, the guide was busy unharnessing the horses, so shivering
we sought refuge in the dirty house, which was not quite so bad within
as we had feared. It was furnished with a long table and two benches
only, and was lighted by a small fire which was burning on a huge open
hearth, and which gave no heat at all. The woman came back and led us to
the other house for supper, which was boiled eggs, and the guide
generously shared his own bread with us, as we had none. There was no
water to drink, and Jo tried, not very successfully, to quench her
thirst with rakia.

There were but two beds, and on inquiry finding that there was no place
for the guide, we allotted one bed to him. On our own bed the sheets had
evidently not been changed since it was first made, and the pillow which
once had been white was a dark ironclad grey. We undid our mackintoshes
and spread them over both counterpane and pillow. We lay down clothed as
we were, and by the time we had finished our preparations the guide was
already snoring.

As soon as the light was turned out the whole room began to tick like
ten agitated clocks, and all about us in the darkness began strange
noises of life: rats scampered in all directions and were finally
hurdling over our heads. We had taken some aspirin to ward off the
stiffness of unaccustomed exercise, but we were sore, and the narrowness
of the bed forced us to lie on our backs; exhaustion, however, conquered
all discomforts, and we slept. Jo awoke in the night and yelped to find
that the mackintosh had slipped and that her head was resting on the
pillow.

We were up again at 5.30, and Vladimir, the guide, suggested that we
should breakfast at Novi Varosh, four hours on; but our stomachs were
not of cast iron, and we clamoured for eggs. We got them, left
Negbina--that was the name of the village--about seven, and once more
adventured on the road.

By eight we had passed the old Serbian frontier: the country was growing
more interesting, like the foothills of the Tyrol; on the streams were
inefficient-looking old wooden mills, the water rushing madly down a
slope and hitting a futile little wheel which turned laboriously.

Novi Varosh, with roofs of weathered wood gleaming purplish amongst the
trees, was a wonderful little town, and quite unlike any other we had
seen; clean without, and if the energy of its citizens at the village
pump is a good sample, clean within also, for Serbia. Here are Turks
too: ladies in veil and trousers, and trousered kiddies with clothes of
orange, yellow and purple. Twice in the streets we were stopped by
authority. Our lunch was well cooked, one can clearly see this has not
been Serbia for long, for the Serbs are the worst eaters in the world.
Jo gave medical advice to a Serb, and on once more.

On the road were travellers never ending in their variety, and one
father was mounted with a pack behind him, and on the top of the pack
his little daughter clad in many coloured cottons, clasping him tight
round the neck and peering inquisitively from behind his ear.

About three p.m. we reached the Lim. The road climbs to a great height,
and the peasants in their gay costumes were reaping, some of the fields
so steep that we wondered how they stood upon them; on the opposite
cliff was an old robber castle like a Rhine fortress.

The Serbian town of Prepolji introduced itself by six Turks lying by
the roadside, then there were three Turkish families, afterwards an
assorted dozen of small girls in trousers, finally, an old man doddering
along in a turban and a veiled beggar woman, who demanded backsheesh.
"Where are the Serbs?" we thought.

The Greek church looked as if it had been new built, so that the Serbs
could claim Prepolji as a Christian town, and had a biscuit tin roof not
yet rusted.

Our hotel was like that where Mr. Pickwick first met Sam Weller, a large
open court with a crazy wooden balcony at the second story, and the
bedrooms opening on to the balcony. When we opened our knapsacks to get
out washing materials, we found that the heat of the horse had melted
all the chocolate in Jan's, and it had run over everything. It was a
mess, but chocolate was precious, and every piece had to be rescued. We
had only been ten hours in the saddle, but we descended stiffly, and
were pounced on by a foolish looking man, with a head to which Jo took
immediate offence. This fellow attached himself to us during the whole
of our stay, and was an intolerable nuisance; we nicknamed him "glue
pot," and only at our moment of departure discovered that he was the
mayor who had been trying to do us honour.

The next day was Sunday, and the village full of peasants. Stiff-legged
and groaning a little within ourselves we walked about the town making
observations: Turkish soldiers, Turkish policemen, Turkish recruits, but
all the peasants Serb. The country costume is different from that of the
north, the perpendicular stripe on the skirt has here given way to
horizontal bands of colour, and some women wear a sort of exaggerated
ham frill about the waist. The men's waistcoats were very ornate, and
much embroidery was upon their coats.

An English nurse came into the town in the afternoon. She, a Russian
girl, and an English orderly had driven from Plevlie, en route to
Uzhitze. Half-way along the wheel of their carriage had broken in
pieces, so they finished the road on foot. Curiously enough we had
travelled from England to Malta with this lady, Sister Rawlins, on the
same transport. The Russian girl had been married only the day before to
a Montenegrin officer, nephew of the Sirdar Voukotitch,
Commander-in-Chief of the North, and she was flying back to Russia to
collect her goods and furniture.

Next day as we were sketching in the picturesque main street, from the
distance came the sounds of a weird wailing, drawing slowly closer and
closer.

"Hurra," thought we--two minds with but a single, etc.,--"a
funeral--magnificent. Just the thing to complete the scene."

A string of donkeys came round the corner, on either flank each animal
bore a case marked with a large red cross. Amongst the animals were
donkey-boys, and it was from their lips came the dismal wailing. Never
have we seen so ragged and wretched a crew. The boys were evidently the
"unfits," and they looked it, every face showed the wan, pallid shadow
of hunger and disease. A few old men in huge fur caps, with rifles on
their backs, stumbled along, guarding the precious convoy. "Glue pot"
led us all to a large empty building, once a Turkish merchant's store,
where the cases were to be housed. The bullock carts with the heavier
packages came in in the evening, and we sent the men five litres of plum
brandy to put some warmth into their miserable bodies. This moved them
once more to singing, but we think the songs sounded a little less
dreary.

The Commandant asked for, and got, half a dozen sheets from us as a sort
of superior backsheesh, and promised us horses for the morrow.

The next morning dawned dismally. Miss Rawlins and her companions were
to go on by post cart, and their conveyance arrived first, only two and
a half hours late. It was a sort of tinker's tent on four rickety
wheels. There seemed to be barely room for one within the dark interior,
but both Miss Rawlins and the little Russian climbed in somehow.
Charlie, the orderly, clung on by his eyelids in front, and off they
went. We last saw two faces peering back at us beneath the fringe of the
tent. They had no luck. Half-way to Uzhitze the cart upset and they were
all rolled into the ditch, missing a precipice of sixty feet or so by
the merest fraction.

Our own horses arrived later, we mounted, and with cheers from the
assembled authorities, we rode off.

The rain came down in a steady drizzle; we discovered that the
waterproof cloaks which we had borrowed from Nish were not very
weathertight. We climbed right up into the clouds, but still the rain
held on. From the floating mist jutted great boulders and huge red
cliffs. Our guide put up an umbrella and rode along crouching beneath
it. At 1400 metres we reached an inn, where we lunched. A Montenegrin
commissioner insisted on paying our bill, and said that we would do the
same for him when he came to England. Every one in Serbia or Montenegro
is interested in ages. They were astounded at ours. They said that Jo
would have been seventeen if she were Serbian; and one rose, shook Jan
warmly by the hand and said he must have "navigated" the marriage well.

We rode over the frontier, but we were not yet in the real Montenegro.
This is not the black mountain where the last dregs of old Serbian
aristocracy defied the Turk, this is still the Sanjak, three years ago
Turkish, and with pleasant pasturages spreading on either hand.

At last we came up over Plevlie. To one corner we could see the town
creeping in a crescent about the foot of a grey hill, far away on the
other side was a little monastery, forlorn and white, like a shivering
saint, and between a great valley with four purplish humps in the midst
of the corn and maize fields, like great whales bursting through a
patchwork quilt.

Our horses were thoroughly cheered up, and we passed through the long
streets of the town at a lively trot, a thing Jo was taught as a child
to consider bad form.

A semi-transparent little man in a black hat stood on the hotel steps
beckoning to us. But we had no use for hotel touts, and waved our sticks
saying, "Hospital." He seemed curiously disappointed.

The hospital, many long low buildings, lay buried in a park of trees.
The staff lived in a tiny house near by, where we were welcomed by the
cook, Mrs. Roworth. She explained that as the house was hardly capable
of holding its ten or twelve occupants, a room had been taken for us at
the inn, but that we were to meal with them.

"Not that you will like the food," she said, "for it's all tinned, and I
have only twenty-five shillings a week to buy milk, bread, and fresh
meat."

We wondered why, in such a fertile country, a party of hard-working
people should be condemned to eat tinned mackerel and vegetables brought
all the way from England?

However, the dinner was excellent--all "disguised," she said, for she
had during the few weeks she had been there concentrated on the art of
disguising bully beef and worse problems, and had sternly put Dr. Clemow
on omelets and beefsteaks, as his digestion had caved in under six
months' unadulterated tinned food.

We met old friends, fellow travellers on the way out. In those days they
were a wistful little party, wondering how they were going to reach
Montenegro, the Adriatic being impossible. At last one of the passes was
hurriedly improved for them by a thousand prisoners, and they rode
through in the snow. Since then typhus had raged, two of their number
had been very ill, and one had died. Their energy had been tremendous,
and everywhere in the country they were spoken of as the wonderful
English hospital, and even from Chainitza, where there was a Russian
hospital, soldiers walked a long day's march in order to be treated by
the English.

Dr. Roger's rival was there, the perpetrator of ninety hernia operations
a week--or was it more?

All this on tinned food!

Our hotel room proved large and comfortable with a talkative willing
Turk in attendance. We slept immensely and were wakened by yet another
horrible cock crowing. All Balkan cocks seem to have bronchitis.

Plevlie is a red-tiled nucleus with a fringe of wood-roofed Serb houses
planted round it. There are ten mosques, while the only Greek church
stands forlorn on the other side of the great hollow two miles away.

The town is not really Montenegrin. It has the cosmopolitan character of
all the Sanjak, Turks, Austro-Turks and Serbs--a mixture like that at
Marseilles or Port Said.

The shops are Turkish, though their turbaned owners, sitting
cross-legged on the floor-counters, can speak only Serb--a thing which
puzzled us at the time.

We saw veiled women and semi-veiled children everywhere, thickly
latticed windows with curious eyes peeping through, and yards with high
wooden palings above to prevent the possible young men on the houses
opposite from catching a glimpse of the fair ladies in the gardens.

Plenty of long-legged Montenegrin officers--with flat caps bearing the
King's initials, and five rings representing the dynasties of the ruling
house--filled the streets, and also the inevitable ragged soldiers with
gorgeous bags on their backs.

Some of the women, too, were wearing these caps, but theirs were yet
smaller and tipped over their noses, like the pork pie hat of our
grandmothers. One closely veiled woman showed the silhouette sticking up
through her veil just like a blacking tin.

The Mahommedan is much more fanatic in these parts than his more
civilized brother of Salonika or Constantinople. Women of the two
religions do not visit. The hatred is partially political, and Jo began
to realize that her dream of visiting a harem would not be easy to
achieve. We met three women walking down a lonely street. Although their
faces were covered with several thicknesses of black chiffon, they
modestly placed them against the wall and stood there, three shapeless
bundles, until we were out of sight.

Jan's feelings were very much hurt, but he soon got used to being
treated like a dangerous dragon.

When we reached our hotel again we found the élite of the town waiting
in the bar-room for us. There was a huge jolly Greek priest, all big hat
and velvet, the prefect, the schoolmaster, a linguist, and the little
black-hatted man whom we had mistaken for a hotel tout.

The priest was president of the Montenegrin Red Cross, the prefect was a
former Prime Minister and a Voukotitch. All important men who are not
Petroviches are Voukotitches; the first being members of the king's and
the second of the queen's family.

The little black-hatted man was secretary of the Red Cross, and was
formally attached to us while there as cicerone. He explained to us that
they had all been in the hotel expecting us the night before, with a
beautiful dinner which had been prepared in our honour.

We apologized and inwardly noted the grateful temperament of the
Montenegrin. We were solemnly treated to coffee and brandy, and the
jolly priest emptied his cigarette box into Jo's lap. When the first
polite ceremoniousness had worn off we asked delicately about the front.

"Did we wish to see the front?"

Certainly, said the prefect, we should have the first horses that should
come back to the town, and the little transparent shadow man should
accompany us. And our letter to the Sirdar Voukotitch, commander in
chief of the north?--He should be told about it on his return that
evening from the front.

At sunset the muezzin sounded, cracked voices cried unmelodiously from
all the minaret tops. Immediately, as if it were their signal, all the
crows arose from the town, hovered around in batches for a moment,
chattering, and flew away up the hill to roost in the trees round the
hospital till sunrise.

Salonika rings with children's cries, Dawson city with the howlings of
dogs, but the towns of the Sanjak have no better music than the croaking
of carrion crows.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER V

THE MONTENEGRIN FRONT ON THE DRINA


When Jan awoke it was dark, and he was with difficulty rousing Jo when
suddenly a voice howled through the keyhole that the horses were
waiting. Jan grabbed his watch--5 a.m.; but the horses had been ordered
for six. Hastily chewing dry biscuit, Jan jumped into his clothes and
ran down. There was a small squat youth with a flabby Mongolian face
hovering between the yard door and the inn, and Jan following him
discovered three horses saddled and waiting. He hastily ordered white
coffee to be prepared, and ran up again to hurry Jo and to pack. He
rushed down again to pay the bill, but found that the Montenegrin Red
Cross had charged itself with everything, very generously, so he ran up
once more to nag at Jo. The secretary, whom we called "the shadow," had
not appeared, so we inquired from the squint-eyed youth, received many
"Bogamis" as answer, but nothing definite; so we decided, as it was now
past six, that he had changed his mind and had sent this chinee-looking
fellow, whom we named "Bogami," in his place.

Jan's horse was like an early "John" drawing of a slender but antiquated
siren, all beautiful curves. Jo's would in England long ago have taken
the boat to Antwerp; her saddle stood up in a huge hump behind and had a
steeple in front, and was covered by what looked like an old bearskin
hearthrug in a temper, one stirrup like a fire shovel was yards too
long, the other far too short, and were set well at the back.

"What queer horses!" we remarked.

"Bogami," said Bogami; "when there are no horses these are good horses,
Bogami."

"Where is the secretary?"

"Bogami nesnam" (don't know).

From Uzhitze we had good horses, from Prepolji moderate, now these;
imagination staggered at what we should descend to if we did a fourth
lap to Cettinje, for instance, but we climbed up. Jo with her queerly
placed stirrups perched forward something like a racing cyclist.
Bogami's horse was innocent of garniture, save for a piece of chain
bound about its lower jaw, but he slung his great coat over the saw edge
of its backbone and leapt on. He must have had a coccyx of cast iron. We
had to kick the animals into a walk--there were fifty kilometres to go.

After a while we began to wonder if it would not be quicker to get off
and foot it, but we did catch up and eventually pass a Red Cross Turk.
We saw a soldier striding ahead. By kicks and shouts we raised a sprint
along the level road; we drew even with him, and then began a race; on
the uphills we beat him, on the downhills he caught up and passed in
front. He was a taciturn fellow, and save that he was going to Fochar we
learnt nothing about him. On a long uphill we gained a hundred yards,
and by supreme efforts held our gains. He eventually disappeared from
view, and we were rejoicing at our speed when we realized that the
telegraph wires were no longer with us--one can always find the nearest
way by following the telegraph, for governments do not waste wire. Jan
looked for them and found them streaming away to the left, and among
them, well up on the horizon, our enemy the soldier.

"Look," we cried to Bogami, "isn't that the shortest way? The wires go
there."

"Bogami," he replied; "wires can, horses can't, bogami."

There is a fine military road to Chainitza, made by the Austrians, but
it remains a white necklace on the hills, almost an ornament to the
landscape. No one seemed to use it, while our old Turkish road which
snaked and twisted up and down was pitted with the hoofs of countless
horses. It is a stony path, and our animals were shod with flat plates
instead of horseshoes; they slipped and slithered, and we wondered if in
youth they had ever had lessons in skating.

There was a heavy mist, but it began to break up, and through peepholes
one caught fleeting glimpses of distant patterning of field and forest,
and hints of great hills. The sun showed like a great pale moon on the
horizon. There were other travellers on the old Turkish trail, horsemen,
Bosnians in great dark claret-coloured turbans, or Montenegrins in their
flat khaki caps, peasants in dirty white cotton pyjamas, thumping before
them animals with pack-swollen sides, soldiers only recognizable from
the peasants by the rifle on their backs, and Turks; most were jolly
fellows, and hailed us cheerfully.

From a house by the roadside burst a sheep, followed by five men. They
chased the animal down the road whistling to it. We had never heard that
whistling was effectual with sheep, and certainly it did not succeed
very well in this instance.

Somewhere beyond this house Jan's inside began to cry for food, two
biscuits and a cup of _café au lait_ being little upon which to found a
long day's riding. He tentatively tried a "compressed luncheon." Its
action was satisfactory, but whether it resulted from real nourishment
contained in the black-looking glue, or whether it came from a sticking
together of the coating of the stomach, we have not yet decided. Jo
preferred rather to endure the hunger.

Bogami had quite a charm; for instance, he appreciated our troubles with
the beasts we were riding. Jo's horse stumbled a good deal on the
downhills; her saddle was very uncomfortable and so narrow that she
could never change her position. We came into most magnificent scenery,
the beauty of which made a deep impression even upon our empty selves.
There were deep green valleys, rising to peaks and hills which faded
away ridge behind ridge of blue into the distant Serbian mountains,
great pine woods of delicate drooping trees which came down and folded
in on every side, and though it was almost September there were
strawberries still ripe at the edge of the road, little red luscious
blobs amidst the green.

Metalka at one o'clock, and we were on the real Montenegrin frontier.
There are two Metalkas, a Montenegrin and an Austrian, and they are
divided one from the other by a strip of land some ten yards across
which rips the village in two like the track of a little cyclone. Bogami
directed us to a shanty labelled "Hotel of Europe." A large woman was
blocking the door; we demanded food, she took no notice. Hunger was
clamouring within us. We demanded a second time. She waved her hand
majestically to her rival in Austria, at whose tables Montenegrin
officers were sitting with coffee.

An officer greeted us.

"We had expected you yesterday," he said.

We waved to the horses.

"No horses."

"That is a pity," he murmured. "You see, there was something to eat
yesterday!"

In spite of his pessimism we got eggs and wine. Bogami had a large
crowd, to whom he lectured, and we sent him out some eggs.

After lunch we pushed on, in conquered territory. To Chainitza they said
was one hour and a half, it proved nearer three.

We joined some peasants, and they told us that they were going to the
great festival. The old mother halted at a sort of sheep pen by the
roadside; when she rejoined us she was wiping her eyes.

"That was my brother," she explained; "he was killed in the war;" for it
is the custom to erect memorial stones by the roadside. Many of these
are very quaint, sometimes painted with a soldier, or else with the
rifle, sword, pistols and medals of the deceased.

Chainitza lies in a backwater, where the deep valley makes a sudden
bend. When we came to it the sun was in our eyes, and halfway between
the crest and the river the town seemed to float in a bluish mist; two
white mosques stood out against the trees, and the roof of one was not
one dome, but many like an inverted egg frier, or almost as though it
was boiling over.

We were stopped at the entry by a sentry.

"Where are you going?"

"To the Russian Hospital."

He took us in charge and led us, in spite of protestations, to the
hotel. A man in a shabby frock-coat received us, and Jo, mistaking him
for the innkeeper, clamoured once more for the Russians. The shabby man
explained that he was the Prefect, and that this was a State reception.
We began to be awed by our own dignity. We explained to him that the
Shadow had changed his mind and had sent Bogami instead.

Bogami brought our knapsacks to our room, where he was immobilized by
the sight of himself in the looking-glass of the wardrobe; probably he
had never seen such a thing before, and he goggled at it. He at last
backed slowly from the room.

We rested a while, then descended to find--the Shadow.

He was rather hurt with us, and wanted to know why the ---- we had gone
off without him. We explained, compared watches, and found that Jan's
was an hour too fast. The poor Shadow had been chasing us on a borrowed
horse, with our permissions to travel in his pocket, and wildly hoping
that he would catch us up before we were arrested as spies.

We had tea with the Russians in a little arbour on the roadside, and
chewed sweets which had just arrived from Petrograd, having been three
months on the journey, but none the worse for that. Many officers came,
amongst them the husband of the little Russian girl we had met at
Prepolji. They all seemed to be Voukotitches, and at last the Sirdar
himself honoured us. He is a huge man, and yet seemed to take up more
room than his size warrants. He has a flat, almost plate-like face, with
pallid blue eyes which seemed to focus some way beyond the object of his
regard. Were his moustache larger he would be rather like Lord
Kitchener, and he was very pleased at the obvious compliment. He poses a
little, moves seldom but suddenly, and shoots his remarks as though
words of command. He was very kind to us, and was immensely astonished
at Jo's Serbian, holding up his hands and saying "Kako" at every one of
her speeches. He suggested that poor Bogami should be beaten, but we
begged him off. Captain Voukotitch, the husband of a day, was appointed
to be our guide for the morrow--because Jo spoke Serbian.

After tea we went up to the bubbly mosque, which was in reality the
Greek church. We entered a large gate; on the one side of a yard was the
church, and on the other a big two-storied rest-house, where one could
lodge while paying devotions or doing pilgrimages. Its long balconies
were filled with country folk all come for the festival, and who were
feasting and laughing as though the war did not exist. The courtyard was
filled with men and women in Bosnian costumes, white and dark red
embroideries. Through the open door of the church one could see the
silhouettes of the peasants bowing before the Ikons and relics. It was
almost dark, and one man began to play a little haunting melody upon a
wooden pipe, but though they linked arms and shuffled their feet, the
young men did not dance.

At supper the Shadow revealed a quaint sense of humour, and so to bed.

The next morning was lovely, and we started at seven with the youngest
Voukotitch and the others. Some officers had lent us their horses, and
Voukotitch had proudly produced his English saddle for Jo. On the road
the spirit of mischief entered him.

"You can ride all right," he said; "wouldn't you like to go to the
nearest machine-gun to the Austrian lines?"

"Rather," said Jo.

"You'll have to do some stiff riding, though. I know the major, and he
is bored to death. He'll let us."

"But what about the bullets?" said the Shadow.

In time the major was produced, emerging from a cottage by the roadside,
other officers with him, and we had a merry coffee party in an arbour.
One told Jo that he was a lawyer. The few Montenegrins who had the
misfortune to be educated were not allowed to serve at the front, but he
had been lucky enough through influence to be allowed to take a
commission. He had not seen much serious fighting, however, as no move
had been made for several months.

Then we tackled the hills. "Come along," said the major, cheerfully; and
his horse's nose went down and its tail went up, and off it slid
downhill. We had seen the Italian officers do such things on the
cinematograph, but little thought that we should be in the same
position. We supposed it would be all right. Jo's horse became nearly
vertical, and she sat back against its tail. Jan followed. Sometimes a
sheet of rock was across the path--then we slid; sometimes the sand
became very soft--we slid again. Then a muddy bit, and the horse
squelched down on his hind quarters.

Here we met a Serbian captain who was in charge of the battery. He was
very lonely, and delighted to have a chance to talk, and he talked hard
all day, showed us a neat reservoir his men had built, explained to us
that beautiful uniforms were coming from Russia soon for the weirdly
garbed beings who were guarding the hills, and asked us to lunch behind
the trenches under a canopy of boughs.

While lunch was being prepared he took us round his artillery, and into
his observation station on the top of a crooked tree. Below us we could
see the river Dreina--on the other side of which was Gorazhda, held by
the Austrians--and the fortified hills behind.

It seemed impossible that this wide peaceful scene was menacing with a
threat of death, yet at intervals one could hear a faint "pop! pop!" as
though far-away giants were holding feast and opening great champagne
bottles. Away in the hills could be seen an encampment of white tents,
which caused a mild excitement, for they had not been there the day
before, and we were told that they were quite out of range.

During lunch the youngest Voukotitch tempted the major--who was in
splendid mood--suggesting that it was rather tame to go home after
having come within mere bowing distance of the Austrians, and that a few
stray bullets would not incommode us.

The major saw reason fairly quickly, so we bestrode our horses again and
continued our switchback course. At an open space where the Austrians
could shoot at us if they wished we had to plunge down the hill quickly,
keeping a distance of one hundred yards from each other.

The little Shadow prudently got off his horse and used its body as a
shield.

We banged at the door of a cottage, and a young lieutenant came out;
somebody said he was nineteen and a hero.

[Illustration: SERB AND MONTENEGRIN OFFICERS ON THE DRINA.]


[Illustration: A CONCEALED GUN EMPLACEMENT ON THE DRINA.]

Here we left our horses and began to scramble through brambles along a
narrow path, climbing up the back of a little hill on the crest of which
were the machine guns. Just before we got to the top we plunged into a
tunnel which bored through the hill; at the end was the gun. The hero
scrambled in, wriggled the gun about and explained. He invited Jo to
shoot. She squashed past him; there was a knob at the back of the gun
on which she pressed her thumbs, and she immediately wanted another pair
with which to stop her ears. The gun jammed suddenly. The hero pulled
the belt about, and Jo set it going once more.

The Austrian machine guns answered back and kept this up, so Jo pressed
the knob again and yet again. Then we got into the trenches above.
Whenever Jo popped her head over the trenches for a good look there were
faint reports from the mountain opposite. One or two bullets whizzed
over our heads, and we realized that they were aiming at Jo's big white
hat.

Jan climbed down the hill and took snap-shots of Gorazhda; the enemy got
a couple of pretty near shots at him.

When the Montenegrins thought this sport was becoming monotonous they
remembered the business of the day. A big house in Gorazhda was said to
be full of Hungarian officers, and they wanted to get the range of this
with one of the big guns. This decision had been made a day or two
before with much deliberation. This they thought the State could afford.
The precious shell was brought out, and every one fondled it.

Men were called out and huge preparations were made for sighting and
taking aim. We scuttled round with field glasses, and finally stood on
tiptoe behind branches on a mound by the side of the gun. There were
many soldiers fussing in the dug-out, and at last they pulled the
string.

"Goodness! Now we've done it," Jo thought, as the mountains sent back
the fearful report in decreasing echoes. We seemed to wait an eternity,
and then "something white" happened far beyond the village.

The officers looked at each other with long faces. "A bad miss--the
expense."

We felt the resources of the Montenegrin Empire were tottering. Awful!
Could they afford another?

Finally, with great courage, they decided that it was better to spend
two shells on getting a decent aim than to lose one for nothing. The
terrific bang went off again, and this time the "something white"
happened right on the roof of the house. The Hungarian officers all ran
out, and the machine guns below jabbered at them. Nobody was killed as
far as we know, but every one was content and delighted.

Sunset was approaching, and we rode away quickly, only stopping once to
drag a reluctant old Turk from the mountain side and make him sing to
the accompaniment of a one-stringed goosla. He hated to do it as all
his best songs were about triumphant Mahommedans crushing Serbs, and of
course he couldn't sing those.

He sat grumpily cross-legged on the ground, encircled by our horses,
droning a song of two notes, touching the string quickly with the flat
lower part of his fingers.

We left him very suddenly because the darkness comes quickly in those
hills, so we made for the high-road as hard as we could.

We rode fast to the Colonel's cottage, sat down to the dinner table,
which was decked with pale blue napkins, and a fine-looking old
Voukotitch, an ex-M.P. in national costume, acted as butler. In spite of
his seventy odd years he had joined the army as a common soldier. He
refused all invitations to sit with us, for he knew his place. The young
husband was his nephew, and they kissed fondly on leave-taking.

We rode back in the moonlight. At one spot on the road was a sawmill,
and the huge white pine logs lying all about looked like the fallen
columns of some ruined Athenian temple. We tried to enjoy the moment,
and to brush aside the awful thought that we must remount Rosinante and
Co. next day.

The Shadow was terribly puffed up about his feat. The following morning
as we were sketching in the town, an officer approached respectfully.

"His excellency the Sirdar invites you to supper," he said.

We considered a moment, for we had intended to return to Plevlie. The
Shadow broke in.

"It is inconvenient to come to supper," he said to our horror. "Tell his
excellency that the gentleman and lady will come to lunch if he wishes
it."

The Sirdar meekly sent answer that lunch would suit him very well, and
we could drive back with him to Plevlie. "Would we come to his house at
12.30?"

The Prefect told us that we ought to go to the lunch at twelve, because
the Sirdar's clock was always half an hour fast. We arrived, but the
Sirdar evidently had been considering us, he did not appear for the half
an hour, so we sat with his staff sipping rakia by the roadside.

The lunch was excellent, but the Sirdar's carriage, like every other
carriage in Montenegro, was a weird, ancient, rusty arabesquish affair,
tied together with wire. We had two resplendent staff officers, armed to
the teeth, who galloped ahead, we had two superior non-coms., also armed
to the dentals, galloping behind, while on the box sat a man with gun,
pistols, sword, dagger and a bottle of wine and water which we passed
round whenever the Sirdar became hoarse. The coachman was as old and as
shabby as his carriage, and every five miles or so was forced to descend
and tie up yet another mishap with wire--ordinary folks' carriages are
only repaired with string.

The Sirdar occupied almost the whole of the back seat, and Jo was
squeezed into the crack which was left. Jan was perched on a sort of
ledge, facing them. The carriage was narrow, six legs were two too many
for the space. Jan's were the superfluous ones. He tried this pose, he
tried that, but in spite of his contortions he endured much of the seven
hours' journey in acute discomfort and the latter part in torture.

In spite of his throat the Sirdar did nearly all the talking. The
country we were passing through were scenes of his battles: with one arm
he threw a company over this hill, with a hand, nearly hitting Jan in
the eye, he marched an army corps along that valley; he explained how he
had been forced to give up the Ministry of War because there was no
other efficient commander for the north.

A blue ridge of pine trees appeared on our right hand.

"You see those hills," said the Sirdar: "I'll tell you the story of a
reply of mine, a funny reply. I ordered a general last winter to march
across those hills. He said that the troops would starve. I looked him
in the eye. Then you will eat wolves, I shouted. He went."

If we passed peasants he stopped them. He seemed to have an
extraordinary memory for names and faces.

"Never forget a face," he said, "never forget its name. That is the
secret of popularity."

He was very anxious that we should go to Cettinje and to Scutari. He
kindly promised to see about it, to arrange for our horses and to have
our passage telegraphed before us. At Podgoritza he said a government
motor-car should wait for us. He advised us to make a detour from the
straight road and to see the famous black lake of Jabliak and the
Dormitor mountains. We thanked him gratefully. He waved our thanks
aside.

"And I will write to my friend the Minister of War. He will arrange that
you go to Scutari." He then explained all the reasons why Montenegro
should hold Scutari when the war was over.

"It was ours," he said; "we only gave it up to Venice so that she should
protect us from the Turk. If we do not hold Scutari, Montenegro can
never become a state, so if we cannot keep her we might as well give up
Cettinje. After all we are but taking back what was once ours."

He was daily expecting the uniforms from Russia, and asked every soldier
on the road for news. At last one said that he had seen them.

"The stuff is rather thin, your excellency, but the boots are splendid."


[Illustration]




CHAPTER VI

NORTHERN MONTENEGRO


We were accosted by a clean-limbed, joyous youth, who bore on his cap
the outstretched winged badge of the police. He said--

"Mister Sirdar, he tell me take you alon' o' Nickshitch."

Sure enough the next morning there he was, with three horses, which if
not the identical animals of our Chainitza trip were sisters or brothers
to them. It was a wretched day, gusty, and the rain sweeping round the
corners of the old streets. Early as was the hour, the wretched
prisoners were peering through the lattice windows of their prison,
which evidently once had been the harem of some wealthy Turk; where
beauties had once lain on voluptuous couches, wretched criminals now
crouched half-starved, racked with disease, and as we passed held out
skinny arms. All Montenegrin saddles are bound on with string, even
those of the highest in the land; indeed, one cannot imagine how the
people did before string was invented, and ours began to slip before we
were well clear of the town. Necessary adjustments were made, and on
once more.

Our guide was well armed--he carried two murderous-looking pistols, and
a long rifle slung over his back. He was in high spirits and showed us
that the proper way to ride Montenegrin horses was to drop the reins on
to the animal's neck, kick it in the stomach with both feet, elevating
your arms and uttering the most unearthly yells. Thus terrified, the
unfortunate wreck would canter a few yards, and our cicerone would turn
in his saddle and grin back at us, who were humanely contented with the
solemn jog-trot of our aged steeds along the well-worn horse-track--for
there was no road.

We crawled along, wretched in the downpour, the scenery completely
hidden by the clouds; but towards midday, as we climbed ever higher and
higher, we plunged into pine forests where the rain began to thin to
mist, veiling the trees with layers of drifting fog. Out of the forests
we came--the rain having ceased--into a strange-looking landscape, whose
japanesiness is equalled possibly only by Japan itself. There were the
queer rounded hills, the gnarled and twisted little pines and dim
fir-clad slopes cutting the sky with sharp grey silhouettes.

Here we stopped to eat. We opened a tin of meat and made rough
sandwiches with the coarse brown or black bread which is the staple food
of Serbian nations. When we were satisfied there was meat left in the
tin. Two wretched, ragged children came on the road singing some
half-Eastern chant, and we hailed them. They refused the food with
dignity, and marched on offended.

We came to the Grand Canyon of Colorado--we beg its pardon--of
Montenegro, The Tara. Great cliffs towered high on either side, great
grey, rugged cliffs topped with pine and scrub oak. Down, down, down to
the river, an hour, and we crossed the bridge out of Novi Bazar into
Montenegro--thirty years free from the Turk. We halted at a little
coffee stall made of boughs. Jan wanted to get a photo, but the women
were so shy that Jo had to push them out into the open.

On the way up the other cliff our guide became communicative. He had
been in America, in the mining camps, and spoke fair American.

"In ole days, dese was de borders," he said; "'ere de Serb, 'n dere de
Turk. Natchurally dey 'ate each oder. Dey waz two fellers 'ad fair cold
feet, one 'ere, one over dere, Turk 'n our chapy. Every day dey come
down to de ribber 'n dey plug't de odder chap wid dere ole pistols what
filled at de nose. But dey neber hit nuttin. One day de Serb 'e got mad
and avade in de ribber, but 'e did'n 'it de Turk. Nex' day dey hot'
avade in 'arf way across. Dey miss again. De tird day dey avades in rite
ter de middle, 'n each shoots up de odder dead. Yessir, 'n dere bodies
float down ter 'ere."

He looked up and pointed.

"Dey was a gooman up dere," he said.

"A gooman?"

"Yes, a man wat 'ad a gooman all to 'isself."

"!!!!"

"Dey was an ole town all made o' stones," our guide explained, "where
dis man made 'is gooman. You know wat a gooman is?--kill all de fellers
what pass 'n do wat you likes."

We understood suddenly that "Government" was indicated.

"Dat's wat I say," he answered, "gooman--'e was killed by a Montenegrin
chap wat throwed 'im orf de cliffs, 'n a Turk gets all 'is land. Dat's
'ow dey was done dose days. Dere ain't much 'o de ole town lef now."

"We 'ad to chase de Turk outer 'ere," he went on; "lots 'o fighting, but
we 'ad luck. You see, dey 'ad two lines, 'an we got de first line before
'e was ready, 'n wiped 'im out, so de secon' line did'n know if it was
'im retreatin' or us advancin', and we was into 'em before dey 'ad made
up dere minds. Yessir."

The ascent was terribly laborious. Our animals were sweating, though
they were carrying nothing but the knapsacks.

"Ye see dat flat stone?" said the guide. "Dat's were de gooman feller
'ide 'is gold. Dey was tree Italians chaps 'ere 'n dey turn ober dat
stone ter roll it downill. 'N underneat was all dat feller's gold. Dat
madum larf, I tell yer."

We climbed higher and yet higher; we thought we would never reach the
crest. The sweat poured from us, and we were drenched.

On the top there were but few stones of the old castle, and we rode over
the ruins. We passed into a queer pallid country, pale grey houses, pale
yellow or pale green fields, grey sky and stones, a violently rolling
plain where our guide lost his way, and we became increasingly aware of
the discomfort of our saddles, and prayed for the journey to end.

We refound the route, and asked a peasant, "How far to Jabliak?"

"Bogami, quarter of an hour."

We cheered.

At the end of twenty minutes we asked once more.

"Bogami, quarter of an hour."

At the end of twenty minutes more we asked again, our spirits were
falling.

"Bogami, quarter of an hour."

"* * *!"

We then asked a peasant and his wife. The woman considered for a moment.

"About an hour," she said.

Her husband turned and swore at her.

"Bogami, don't believe her, gentlemen," he cried, "it's only a quarter
of an hour."

We left them quarrelling.

It grew dark, and we grew miserable. Jabliak seemed like a dream, and we
like poor wandering Jews, cursed ever to roam on detestable saddles in
this queer pallid country.

At last a peasant said it was five minutes off, and then it really was a
quarter of an hour distant.

We came down from the hills to find the whole aristocracy--one
captain--not to say all their populace, out on the green to do us
honour. They had been informed by telegraph of our august decision to
sleep in their wooden village. When we got off our horses our knees were
so cramped that we could scarcely stand, and we hobbled after the
captain into a bitterly cold room without furniture. Various
Montenegrins came and looked at us, and an old veterinary surgeon, also
_en route_, but in the opposite direction, conversed in bad German. The
old vet. was a Roumanian, and the only animal doctor in all Montenegro.

To their great surprise we demanded something to eat.

"Supper is at nine," they said severely.

"But we have had nothing since ten this morning," we protested.

"But supper will be ready at nine," they said again.

After a lot of trouble we got some scrambled eggs, but nothing would
persuade our guide, whose name, by the way, was "Mike," to have
anything. It almost seemed improper to eat at the wrong hours, even if
one was hungry.

After supper we sat growing colder and colder. At last, in desperation,
we asked if there were no place in the village which had a fire.

"Oh yes, there is a fire in the other café," and thither we were
conducted.

We were in a jolly wooden room, with a blazing stove and a most welcome
fugginess. The hostess brought us rakia, coffee and walnuts, and did her
utmost to make us comfortable. Montenegrins crowded in, and discussed
the probable end of the war. There was little enthusiasm shown, most of
the talk was of the hardships, and a little grumbling that the farms
were going to pieces because of the lack of men.

Before leaving Plevlie, Dr. Clemow had presented Jan with a box of Red
Cross cigars, and he handed one to the captain. The official received it
gratefully.

"Ah!" he said. "Cigars, eh! One does not often see those nowadays."

The cigar was a Trichinopoli. Jan said nothing, but watched. The captain
lit the cigar manfully, and for some minutes puffed, looking the
apotheosis of aristocracy. Presently his puffing ceased, he looked
thoughtful, and then saying that he had forgotten an important paper
which he had not signed, he fled. We found the cigars most useful
afterwards, as a sort of spiritual disinfector, infallible against
bores.

Into the cracks of the ceiling were stuck white and yellow flowers,
thyme and other plants, till the roof looked like an inverted
flower-bed. We had noticed this custom before, and asked Mike if it had
any significance.

"Oh yes," he answered, "all dose tings, dey stuck up dere 'gainst de
fleas 'n bugs."

This was translated into Serbian, and the woman boxed his ears.

We supped on meat--three courses--meat, meat, meat, and so tough that
our teeth bounced off, and we were compelled to bolt the morsels whole.
One course tired us out, weary as we already were with our journey, but
Mike, making up for his former abstinence, wolfed all his own share and
what remained over from ours.

The night was so cold that we went to bed in our clothes, and even then
could not sleep for hours.

We woke with difficulty to a glorious day, and found that what we had
thought yesterday to be a plain was in truth a great plateau surrounded
by towering grey mountains on which were gulfs and gullies filled with
eternal snow. Jabliak is a queer village, fifty or sixty weathered
wooden houses--with the high-peaked roof of Northern Serbia--flung down
into this wilderness, where the grass and crops fight for existence with
the pushing stones, and where the summer is so short that the captain's
plum tree--the only one--will not ripen save in exceptional years. Never
a wheel comes to Jabliak, and so it is a village without streets.
Everything which passes here is horse-or woman-borne, and for hay they
use long narrow sledges which slide over the stones and slippery grass
as though it were snow.

"Urrgh," said a man, "you should see this in winter. Snow ten and twelve
feet deep, and only just the roofs and the tops of the telegraph-poles
emerging."

The village escorted us to see the famous Black Lake below the peaks of
Dormitor.

The lake is beautiful enough, but too big for mystery, too small to be
impressive. One had imagined it twinkling like the wicked pupil of a
witch's eye, with cornea of white stones and eye-lashes of pine trees,
and we desecrated even its stillness by shooting at wild duck with a
rifle.

Jan had been describing to the villagers how well Jo rode; they now
think he is a liar. Her horse took an unexpected jump at a small
obstacle; the huge hump at the back of the saddle rose suddenly, threw
her forward, and before she had realized anything, she was hanging
almost upside down about the horse's neck, helpless because of the
enormous steeple in front. This horse, as though quite used to similar
occurrences, stood quietly contemplative, till Mike had restored her to
a perpendicular.

Then on again. At times the tracks grew very muddy, and the horses
side-slipped a good deal. At the top of a pass we halted to get coffee
from a leafy hut. Before us were the mountains of Voynik, a blue ridge
with shadowy, strange crevasses and cliffs; behind us Dormitor was still
visible, a faint stain on the sky, as though that great canopy had been
dragging edges in the dew.

Four women clambered up towards us. When they had reached the top they
flung down their enormous knapsacks and sat down. They were a cheery,
pretty set, and we asked them where they were going.

"To the front," they said.

"What for?"

"Those are for our husbands and brothers," answered they, patting the
huge coloured knapsacks.

"How far have you to walk?" we asked.

"Four more days."

"And how far have you walked?"

"Four days."

No complaining, no repining, just a statement of fact, these women were
cheerfully tramping eight days with bundles weighing from 45 to 50
pounds upon their backs, to take a few luxuries, or necessities, to
their fighting kin.

We bade them a jolly farewell, wished them luck, and started downhill.

The track became so steep that we had to descend from our horses and
walk, and so we came to Shavnik.

Shavnik is not of wood; it is stone, and as we came into its little
square--with the white river-bed on one side--we realized that no
welcome attended us. To our indignant dismay the inn was full, and no
telegram from the "State" had arrived.

[Illustration: PEASANT WOMEN OF THE MOUNTAINS.]

[Illustration: A VILLAGE OF NORTH MONTENEGRO.]

We learned that in Montenegro are two kinds of travellers--royalties
and nobodies. Royalties are done for, nobodies do the best they can. We
found a not overclean room over a shop--there was nothing better--we had
already experienced worse: so we ordered supper, and went off to the
telegraph station, to make sure that we arrived as "Royalty" at the next
stop.

A man suddenly burst into the office, crying, "Sirdar! Sirdar!"

Jo and Jan made their way through the darkness to the inn, squeezed
between sweating horses to the door. We were admitted.

The Sirdar received us kindly, but was dreadfully tired, and looked
years older than he had two days before. He had ridden some 150
kilometres in sixteen hours, had left Chainitza at two o'clock in the
morning, and had been in the saddle ever since. He is a famous horseman,
but is no longer young. Almost all his escort had succumbed to the
speed, and he was full of the story of his orderly's horse which had
done 300 kilometres in four days, and was the only animal which had come
through with him, he having changed mounts at Plevlie. We left him and
went straight to bed.

Just as we were comfortably dozing off, a man burst into the room and
demanded "Mike," and said something about a horse. Jan dressed hurriedly
and clattered downstairs. It was pitch dark. He ran to the stable, felt
his way in, and struck a match. There were two horses, one was lying on
its side, evidently foundered and dying but Jan felt that they would not
have disturbed him for that. By matchlight again he found that his own
horses had been turned out by the Sirdar's orderly, and that one was
missing. Mike was not to be found, but the missing horse was discovered
by a small boy in the dry river-bed apparently in search of water. Jan
retired to his bedroom to find that in his absence two more strangers
had burst in, to Jo's indignation. He pushed them out and locked the
door.

When we awoke the Sirdar had already retaken his whirlwind
course--evidently grave news called him to Cettinje--leaving the
orderly's gallant horse dead behind him.

"He kills many horses," said a peasant, shaking his head; "he rides
fast--always."

We crossed the dry bed of the river and prepared for the hill in front
of us. Suddenly Mike's horse plunged into a bog. The poor beast sprawled
in the treacherous green up to its stomach, and, thinking its last hour
had come, groaned loudly. Mike threw himself from the saddle, and with
great effort at last extracted his horse, which emerged trembling and
dripping with slime. Mike grinned ruefully.

"I orter remembered," he admitted. "Sirdar, 'e get in dere one day
'imself."

This day's riding was the worst we had yet experienced. Our horses were
fagged, the road abominable, great stones everywhere on the degenerated
Turkish roads.

The Turkish road is a narrowish path of flat paving-stones laid directly
upon mother earth: but that is the first stage. In the second stage the
paving-stones have begun to turn and lie like slates on a roof; in the
third they have turned completely on edge, like a row of dominoes, and
the horses, stepping delicately between the obstacles, pound the exposed
earth to deep trenches of semi-liquid mud. In the fourth stage the
stones have entirely disappeared, leaving only the trenches which the
horses have formed, so that the path is like a sheet of violently
corrugated iron. Most of the tracks are now between the third and fourth
stages of degeneration. One never knows how far the horse will plunge
his legs into the trenches, for sometimes they are very shallow, and
sometimes the leg is engulfed to the shoulder.

Jan's horse slipped over one domino, went up to the shoulder into a
trench, and off came the rider. Luckily he fell upon a heap of stones,
and not into the mud, but he decided for all that to walk for a bit.

Every now and then one came across traces of the construction of a great
road--white new stone embankments that started out of nothing, and went
to nowhere, and Mike confessed that he had lost the path once more--

"When I come out of dat confounded mod!"

After a hustle across country we found the road, and wished that we had
not, for it was a Turkish track in its most belligerent form.

At last we reached the top and rested awhile. Mike showed us his
revolver.

"He good revolver," he said. "De las' man I shoot he killin' a vooman. I
come. He run away. I tell 'im to stop, but he no stop, so I shoot 'im
leg. 'E try to 'it me wi' a gon."

The man got fourteen years.

We pushed on again, and on the road picked up an overcoat, which later
we were able to restore to its owner, a Turk, who was going to
Nickshitch to buy sugar and salt for Plevlie.

Bits of the big white road appeared and reappeared with insistence. We
asked who was responsible for its inception.

"Sirdar," said Mike; "he good boy. Much work."

The country was now like brown velvet spread over heaps of gigantic
potatoes.

Our horses grew slower and slower, and the inn which we were seeking
seemed ever further and further away. We passed many peasants, and had
evidently entered the land of Venus, for each one was more beautiful
than the neighbour. Since Jabliak we had not seen an ugly man or woman,
and the dignity of their carriage was exceeded only by the nobleness of
their features. Ugly women must be valuable in these parts, and probably
marry early; humans ever prize the rare above the beautiful.

Mike spoke to many of the girls, asking them their names and of their
homes. One had his own name--which we forget--and he said that she must
be his cousin, and that if she would wait where she was he would come
back later and give her a lift.

At last we came to the wooden inn.

The better-class inns have dining-room and kitchen separate, the
second-class both are one, but in each case the fire is made on a heap
of earth piled in the centre of the floor; there is no chimney, and the
smoke fills the room with a blue haze, smarting in the eyes; it drifts
up to the roof, where hams are hung, and finds its way out through the
cracks in the wooden roofing slats. This inn was second-class, and along
one wall was a deep trough, in which were four huge lumps of a white
substance which puzzled us. First we thought it was snow, but that
seemed impossible; then we thought it was salt--but why?

It was snow, there being no water fit to drink, so the snow was stored
in the winter in huge underground cellars.

We got coffee and kaimak--a sort of cross between sour milk and cream
cheese--and as a great honour the lady of the house, a villainously
dirty-looking woman, brought us two eggs. Jan's was bad, but he put it
aside, saying nothing, for it is impossible to explain to these people
what is a "bad" egg--all are alike to them.

We took an affectionate leave of Mike, for here we degenerated to a
carriage, which was waiting us, and he rode off, dragging our tired
horses behind him.

As we were getting into the carriage the dirty woman ran up and, before
Jo could ward it off, planted a loving kiss on either cheek.

We flung our weary limbs upon the rusty cushions. Our driver was a
cheery fellow, who only answered "quite" to everything we said. We drove
through miles of country so stony that all the world had turned grey as
though it had remembered how old it was. The road twisted and curled
about the mountains like the flourish of Corporal Trim's stick: below
one could see the road, only half a mile off as the crow flies, but a
good five miles by the curves. We were blocked by a great hay-cart. Our
driver shouted and cursed without effect, so he climbed down from the
box, and, running round the hay, slashed the driver of it with his whip.
We expected a free fight, but nothing occurred. When the hay had
modestly drawn aside, we found "only a girl." Poor thing! she looked
rueful enough.

The road was the best we had seen in all the Balkans, white and
well-surfaced like an English country highway, and at last we clattered
into Nickshitch, the most important town of Northern Montenegro. It was
like a fair-sized Cornish village, with little stone houses and
stone-walled gardens filled with sunflowers.

A charming old major came to the inn to do us the honour we had
telegraphed for, and together we strolled about the streets. There is a
pretty Greek church at one end on a formal mound, and behind the town
runs a sheer fin of rock topped by an old castle where once had lived
another man who "was a gooman all to hisself;" now it is a monastery,
and one of the most picturesque in Montenegro.

We dined upon beautiful trout fresh from the river, and large green
figs. Undressing, Jan found a louse in his shirt--that came from the
dirty bedroom at Shavnik evidently. He went to bed, but his troubles
were not yet over; there was another foreign presence, a presence which
raised large and itching lumps. He hunted without success for some time,
but at last caught and exterminated an enormous bug. After which there
was peace.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII

TO CETTINJE


The rain poured all night. At five o'clock they called us, telling us
_not_ to wake up as the motor would come later. At six they knocked
again, saying--

"Get up quickly; the carriage is at the door."

No explanations.

We hurried so much that we left our best soap and our mascot, a
beautiful little wooden chicken, behind for ever. The major was waiting
in the bar room.

We were sorry to say good-bye, he was lonely, and we liked him; but we
lost no time, as we were seven hours from Podgoritza and goodness knows
how far from Cettinje.

The carriage and coachman were the same as yesterday's, but his
expression was so lugubrious in the downpouring rain that he looked
another man.

Just outside the village he picked up a friend and put her in the
carriage. She was a velvet-coated old lady with a flat white face and
two bright birdlike brown eyes which she never took off us.
Conversation was impossible, as she had only one tooth, round which her
speech whistled unintelligibly, and she hiccuped loudly once in every
half-hour. We were most uncomfortable. The hood was up, and a piece of
tarpaulin was stretched from it across to the coachman's seat, blocking
out the view except for the little we could see through a tiny triangle.

What with three humans, our bags, the old lady's bundle, and an enormous
sponge cake, we were very cramped, and whenever we tried to move a
stiffened knee her bright eye was on it, and she made some suitable
remark to which we always had to answer with "Ne rasumem," "I don't
understand," the while beaming at her to show we appreciated her efforts
to put us at our ease.

The mist and rain entirely obscured the view. Now and then a tree showed
as a thumb-mark on the grey. We little knew that we were passing through
some of the most marvellous scenery in Europe.

The carriage settled down with a bump. Something wrong with the harness;
string was produced, and it was made usable for the next half-hour.
Carriages in Montenegro must have been designed in the days when
builders thought more of voluptuous curves than of breaking strains, for
we have never been in one of them without many halts, during which the
coachman endeavoured to tie the carriage together with string or wire to
prevent it from coming in two.

We stopped at wayside inns and politely treated the old lady to coffee
at a penny a cup to make up for our inappreciation of her conversational
powers.

Women passed carrying the usual enormous bundles. Sometimes they were
accompanied by husbands or brothers, who strolled along entirely
unladen.

Jo busily sketched everybody she saw.

Passers-by demanded, "What is she doing?" and the onlookers answered--

"She is writing us;" for everything that is done with pencil on paper is
to them writing.

One pretty young woman shook her fist, laughing--

"If I could write, I would write _you_," she said.

We were no longer in the Sanjak. Turkish influence had vanished, and we
longed to see the famous Black Mountains of old Montenegro.

At Danilograd we marvelled at the enormous expensive bridge which seemed
to lead to nothing but a couple of tiny villages. We missed the
picturesque Turkish houses, built indeed only for to-day like their
roads, but full of unexpected corners and mysterious balconies. The
Montenegrin houses were small and simple, four walls and a roof, like
the drawing of a three-year-old child. The only thing lacking was the
curly smoke coming from the chimney. Broad streets lined with these
houses were unexhilarating in effect, and would have been more
depressing except for the bright colours with which they were painted.

When the horses were replete after their midday meal we loaded up,
adding to our numbers a taciturn man who sat on the box. We rolled on to
Podgoritza, arriving at two o'clock in a steady downpour.

Podgoritza seemed unaware of our arrival. The streets were empty, and
the Prefect's offices were tenanted only by the porter, a Turk, who
remarked that the Prefect was taking his siesta, and seemed to think
that was the end of it.

This was awful, after being Highnesses for a week, to be treated just
like ordinary people, and perhaps to lose all chance of reaching
Cettinje that night.

"Produce the Prefect," said Jo, stamping her foot, but the Turk only
smiled and suggested a visit to the adjutant's office. Back to the
carriage we went and drove to a place like a luggage depôt. No adjutant,
nothing but giggling boys. Our coachman became restive and said his
horses were tired of the rain, so we deposited the old lady,
substituted a man in American clothes who seemed sympathetic, and drove
back to the Prefect's office with him. There we found a sleepy
lieutenant who ordered coffee, while our American-speaking friend
explained to him that we were very Great People, and that something
ought immediately to be done for us. So the officer promised to get the
Prefect as soon as possible, and we went to the hotel to drink more
coffee with our baggy-trousered friend, who told us that he was one of a
huge contingent of Montenegrins who had travelled from America to fight
for the little country. "Say, who are your pals?" said a nasal voice,
and the owner, a pleasant-looking man in a broad-shouldered mackintosh,
took a seat at our table. He was also a Montenegrin, and had been mining
in America for some years. More coffees were ordered. We confided to the
new American Montenegrin that we did not like Podgoritza, and he tried
to find excuses--the hour, the bad weather. The hotel-keeper came up and
intimated in awestruck tones that the Prefect had just looked in with
some friends.

Our appearance did not seem to impress the Prefect in the least, and
small wonder. He owned to having received a telegram about us, but there
was no motor-car available for that day, and he departed.

"The Prefect is only more unpleasant than Podgoritza," said Jo to the
American in the mackintosh; but he deduced dyspepsia.

The Prefect, having been to his office and having seen the lieutenant,
came back in five minutes, rather more suave in manner, and announced
impressively that he was going to give us his own carriage.

But the rain, the giggling boys, the smiling Turk, and the sudden drop
from royalty to insignificance had been rankling in Jo's mind. She sat
back haughtily and remarked--

"But the Sirdar promised us a motor-car."

"I will go and see if it is possible," said the Prefect, and he dashed
out into the rain. He returned full of apologies. All the motors were
out, but he would send his carriage round immediately. "A delightful
carriage," he added.

It arrived--a landau such as one would find at Waddingsgate-super-Mare,
so free from scars that every Montenegrin turned to look at it.

The hotel-keepers, our American friends, and the Prefect and his captain
stood pointing out its beauties, and we left them standing in the rain.

"I shall always put on side in this country," said Jo as she bit a large
mouthful of cheese.

We pounded along, and the day slowly grew darker. We passed an
encampment, where the firelight thrown up on to the trees made a weird
and jolly sight.

The hours passed by slowly. Suddenly (our coachman was probably dozing)
we ran into something. It was a carriage, a square grey thing. Our
coachman howled to it, and it started slowly forward up the steep hill.
A bright light streamed from the windows and cut a radiant path in the
foggy rains. Some one threw away a cigar-end. The wet road shining in
the glare of our pink candles, and the lightning flashing intermittently
so that the mountain-tops sprang out to disappear again in the darkness;
we felt as if we were living in the introduction of a mystery story from
the _Strand Magazine_.

At last in the misty rain we saw the aura of the lights of Cettinje. At
last we wound slowly into wet streets, passed our mysterious companion
without being able to see who was in it, and so to the hotel. Since the
morning we had driven fourteen hours, and we were glad beyond measure to
stretch and to find really comfortable beds.

The next day we got up early. There was much to do. We were to see the
War Minister about Scutari, to present a letter of introduction to the
English minister, and to inspect the town.

Nature has half filled a big crater with silt, and the Montenegrins
have half covered it with Cettinje.

It is a polychromatic village of little square houses, cheerfully
dreary, and one does not see its uses except to be out of the way. The
only building with any architectural beauty is the monastery where the
old bishops reigned, and which must have many a queer tale to tell.

Asking for the Count de Salis, the English minister, we were directed to
the diplomatic street, a collection of tiny houses grouped respectfully
in front of the Palace, which itself was no larger than a Park Lane
house laid edgeways, and with the paint peeling from its walls.

Over the front door of each little house a sort of barber's pole stuck
outwards, striped with the national colours of the minister living
within.

We noticed with pride and relief that the Count de Salis' pole was
painted a reticent white. The sympathetic old lady who opened the door
directed us to the Legation. There we found him inspecting the damages
wreaked by the storm of overnight. The Legation was big and cold, and as
the handsome fireplaces sent out by the British Board of Works were for
anthracite only (and Montenegro produces only wood), the English
minister preferred his warm cottage to the unheated Palace.

He wished us luck in our quest for Scutari, and asked us to tea. We
then hurried to an awful building where the governing of Montenegro was
done--a concrete erection, presented to Montenegro by the British
Government, and an exact imitation of one of our workhouses. Here we
found the Minister of War, a gorgeously dressed little man with a
pleasant grandfatherly gleam in his eye. He only spoke Serbian, but with
him was an unshaven young man whose chest was covered with gold
danglers, who immediately began to air his quite passable French. We
explained what we had been doing and what we wanted to do. The War
Minister had not heard of US from the Sirdar, who had been resting after
his terrific ride, but said that they were to see each other that day.
The little man beamed upon us, and said they always wished to do
anything for the English, but he must first see the Sirdar.

"By the bye," he said, "I forgot to introduce you. This is Prince Peter,
commander of the forces on the Adriatic coast." The young man arose and
clicked his heels. We too got up. He shook hands with us solemnly, and
Jo, unused to addressing Royalty, said, "Dobra Dan" (Good day).

Then we all sat down again, a further rendezvous was arranged for the
evening, and we left, carrying away the impression that the War Minister
and we had bowed thirty times to each other before we got out of the
door.

Out in the streets, as we were sketching, we saw a large smile under a
Staff officer's cap bearing down upon us. It was the Sirdar, quite
rested and looking twenty years younger. He was going to the War
Minister's, and promised to arrange at once for our visit to Scutari. He
looked at our cryptic drawings of road scavengers, threw up his hands
and ejaculating "Kako"--strode out of our lives.

Tea in the little house with the discreet white pole was a great
pleasure. Such tea we had not drunk since leaving England--butter, jam
made by the old housekeeper, who pointed this out to us when she brought
in a relay of hot water.

She was the daughter of a man who had been exiled from his village
because he had taken a prominent part in a blood feud, and the old
Gospodar had told him he would be healthier elsewhere. So they had
emigrated as far as Serbia, where she had learnt to read and write.

A lady of good family but bad character suddenly decided to leave
Montenegro, and fled to the shores of Cattaro, carrying with her a large
number of State secrets. The Court was aghast. What was to be done?

A villain was needed. The father was decided upon, and with the help of
the lady's brothers she was kidnapped, carried back to Montenegro, and
disappeared for ever. For which noble work he was permitted to return to
his village.

The old lady had a supreme contempt for the Montenegrins who had not
"travelled," but she looked upon the growing pomp of the Court with
suspicion.

"Ah," she said, "those were fine days when the king was only the
Gospodar, and there were none of these gold embroidered uniforms about,
and the Queen and I used to slide down the Palace banisters together."

In those days the Royal family inhabited the top story only, while the
ground floor was filled with wood for the winter. Just round the corner
was the old pink palace, now used as a riding school. It had been the
first place in Montenegro to possess a billiard-table. So,
billiard-tables being rarer and more curious than kings--the palace had
been called the BILLIADO.

The Queen, whatever agility she may have possessed once when navigating
banisters, is now a sedate and domestic person, and doesn't hold with
bluestockings, notwithstanding the "Higher Education" of some of her
daughters.

The story goes that once when the King was away she inaugurated one of
those thorough-paced spring cleanings dear to most women's hearts;
ordered the dining-room furniture into the street, and superintended the
beating of it. Women hold a poor position in Montenegro, but one of
character can carry all before her. A well-known English nurse was
managing a hospital in Cettinje during the first Balkan War. One of her
patients, though well connected as peasants often are in Montenegro, was
a drunken old reprobate, and she told the authorities he must go. They
demurred--his relations must not be offended. She insisted. They did
nothing. One morning they found him, bed and all, in the middle of the
street opposite the King's palace.

The authorities swallowed their lesson.

In the evening we walked over the stony hills with our host, and first
had a glimpse of the real character of the country which had for so long
kept the Turks at bay. One realized how much the people owed to the land
for their boasted independence. Barren rock and scrub oak, no army could
live here in sufficient numbers to subdue even a semi-warlike nation.
Cettinje has been burned many a time by the Moslem, but starvation
eventually drove him back to the fatter plains of the Sanjak, leaving a
profitless victory behind him. Napoleon and Moscow over again.

More miners from America passed with their showy machine-woven clothes,
accompanied by their wives, who had evidently stayed behind in the old
country. Otherwise they would have picked up new-fangled ideas about the
rights of women, and would certainly have refused to shoulder the
enormous American suit cases while their men ambled carelessly in front.

The next day we had a further interview with the War Minister, who
introduced to us a man in corduroys, the only really round-faced person
we had met in Montenegro. Part of his name was "Ob," so as we forgot the
rest of it we called him Dr. Ob. He was the minister of drains, and such
things. As nothing had been previously explained to him about us, he
covered his mystification by hailing us jovially, after which he
misconstrued everything we said.

He became very excited when we said we had brought 14,000 kilos of
stores into Montenegro.

"But we have not got it yet," he ejaculated. We explained that it was
for the English hospital, and he subsided, very disappointed.

Scutari was talked over again, and Dr. Ob promised to come and tell us
that evening if Cettinje could supply a motor for the next morning.

More bows and smiles, and we left wondering. Montenegrins always promise
even when they have no intention of performance--something like the
stage Irishman,--and we were surprised when Dr. Ob met us in the evening
and said that the motor was arranged for next morning at eight.

We tea'd with the count once more. In the next house lived a gorgeous
old gentleman, and we heard that he had been War Minister for forty odd
years. After thirty years or so of office it was considered that he
could better uphold the dignity of his position were he able to sign his
name. So he had to learn.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VIII

THE LAKE OF SCUTARI


Dr. Ob, dressed in thick corduroys and an enormous pith helmet, arrived
punctually with the motor, a Montenegrin Government motor. He had two
companions, a girl simply dressed with coat and skirt which did not
match, and cotton gloves whose burst finger ends were not darned, a Miss
Petrovitch, and an officer. The coachwork--if one may dignify it by such
a phrase--which was made from packing cases, had a thousand creaks and
one abominable squeak, which made conversation impossible. The scenery
was all grey rock and little scrubby trees; the road was magnificent and
wound and twisted about the mountain side like a whip lash. Driving down
these curves was no amateur's game, and we saw immediately that our
chauffeur knew his job. We came over a ridge, and in the far distance,
gleaming like the sun itself, a corner of the Lake of Scutari showed
between two hill crests.

We ran into a fertile valley, passed through Rieka--where was the first
Slavonic printing-press--and up into the barren mountains once more.
The peasants seem very industrious, every little pocket of earth is here
carefully cultivated and banked almost in Arab fashion. The houses, too,
were better, and rather Italian with painted balconies, but are built of
porous stone and are damp in winter. The Rieka river ran along the road
for some way, very green and covered with water-lily pods.

We passed a standing carriage, in which was a large man in Montenegrin
clothes, and a little further on passed a man in a grey suit walking.
Dr. Ob gesticulated wildly, and pulled up the motor to gather in a
Frenchman--somebody in the French legation who was going to Scutari for
a week end. He turned suddenly to Jan.

"Ce n'est pas une vie, monsieur," were the first words he uttered. He
admired Miss Petrovitch very much, and told us in an undertone that she
was a daughter of the governor of Scutari, niece of the King of
Montenegro, and one of "les familles le plus chic."

We descended steeply to the Port, ten variously coloured houses and
twenty-five variously clothed people. Miss Petrovitch, to our amazement,
embraced a rather dirty old peasant, the doctor disappeared to find us
luncheon, the Frenchman to wash, and we strolled about.

A voice hailed us, and turning round, we found our mackintoshed American
of Pod. We took him to the inn and stood him a drink. Dr. Ob came in and
we introduced; but Dr. Ob was snifty and the American shy. His home was
near by and he wished us to visit him, but there was no time.

We lunched in a bedroom plastered with pictures. Montenegrins seem to be
ashamed of walls, and they adore royalty. In every room one finds
portraits of the King of Montenegro, the queen, the princes, the King of
Italy, his queen, the Tzar of Russia, the grand dukes and duchesses, the
King of Serbia and his princes, and to cap all a sort of comprehensive
tableau of all the male crowned heads of Europe--including
Turkey--balanced by another commemorating all the queens of
Europe--excluding Turkey--the spaces left between these august people
are filled with family portraits, framed samplers, picture postcards or
a German print showing the seven ages of man over a sort of step-ladder.

After lunch, loaded with grapes which Miss Petrovitch's peasant friend
brought us, we trooped down to the steamer, which had been an old
Turkish gun monitor and had been captured when the Montenegrins took
Scutari.

The boat was crowded, and the Frenchman took refuge in the captain's
cabin, which was crammed with red pepper pods, and went to sleep. Jo
began sketching at once. There were two full-blooded niggers aboard with
us: they were descendants of the Ethiopian slaves of the harems; but the
race is dying out, for the climate does not suit them. We steamed out
into the lake, down the "kingly" canal, a shallow ditch in the mud.
Magnificent mountains rush down on every side to the water, in which
stunted willow trees with myriad roots--like mangroves--find an
amphibious existence. We passed through their groves, hooting as though
we were leaving Liverpool, and out into the eau-de-nil waters of the
open lake.

In three hours we reached Plavnitza, a quay on the mud, where more
passengers were waiting for our already crowded craft. There were
officers, peasants, Turks, and soldiers clad in French firemen's
uniforms. These uniforms, by the way, caused a lot of ill-feeling in
Montenegro. The French sent them out in a spirit of pure economical
charity, and had the Frenchmen not been, on the average, small, and the
Montenegrin, contrariwise, large, perhaps the gift would have been
received with a better grace; but the sight of these enormous men
bursting in all places from their all too tight regimentals, was
ludicrous, and the soldiers felt it keenly.

Two women came aboard, attached to officers, and wearing long light
blue coats, the ceremonious dress of all classes; one carried a wooden
cradle strapped on her back, the woman with no cradle had in her arms a
baby of some ten or eleven months, which she fed alternately on grapes
and pomegranate seeds. With each was a large family including a beastly
little boy who spat all over the decks, and one of the fathers, a stern
gold-laced officer, carried a dogwhip with which to rule his offspring.

After a while we caught sight of Tarabosch, the famous mountain, and
then the silhouette of the old Venetian fortress. From the water
projected the funnels of yet another Turkish ship which had been sunk in
the Balkan war, and we steamed into the amphibious trees on the mudflats
of Scutari.

A boat with chairs in it came for us and we disembarked. The boat was
rather like one of those that children make from paper, called cocked
hats, only rather elongated, and the rowers pushed at the oars which
hung from twisted osier loops. Governor Petrovitch met us on the quay.
He was a fine-featured old man dressed in all the barbaric splendour of
a full national costume, pale green long-skirted coat, red gold
embroidered waistcoat, and baggy dark blue knee breeches with a huge
amount of waste material in the seat. He kissed his daughter and greeted
us genially. We clambered into the usual dilapidated cab with the usual
dilapidated horses, and off to the hotel.

The women on the roadside were clad in picturesque ever-varying
costumes. There were narrow carts with high Indian-like wheels studded
with large nails; there were Albanians in costumes of black and white,
everything we had hoped or expected.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER IX

SCUTARI


After a wash we went into the streets. It was the Orient, just as
Eastern as Colombo or Port Said. The little fruit and jewellers' shops
with square lanterns, the tailors sitting cross-legged in their windows,
the strange medley of costumes--even the long lean dogs looked as if
they had been kicked from the doors of a thousand mosques.

We left the shops for further explorations. Scutari has always been
described as such a beautiful town. The adjective does not seem
picturesque: yes, quaint, strange decidedly. One's second impression
after the shops is this:--

[Illustration]

Miles and miles of walls with great doors. The main streets branch out
into thousands of impasses each ending in a locked door. There are
hardly any connecting streets, for somebody's walled garden is between.
The Mahommedans hide in seclusion on one side of the town, while their
hated enemies the Christians live on the other. Each house, Turk or
Christian, has the same air of defiant privacy, the only difference
being that the Turk's windows are blocked with painted lattice. The
Mahommedan women's faces are covered with several thicknesses of
chiffon, generally black, while the Christian peasant women walk about
with an eye and a half peering from the shrouding folds of a cotton head
shawl which they hold tightly under their noses.

With difficulty we found the English consul's house, as the Albanians
speak no Serb and Montenegrins were not to be found at every street
corner. At last we found it appropriately enough in the Rue du Consulat
d'Angleterre. A gorgeous old butler resembling a wolf ushered us from
the blank walled street into a beautiful square garden filled with
flowering shrubs and creepers. Not to be outdone by the colours of the
flowers, the butler was clad in a red waistcoat, embroidered with gold,
a green cloth coat, blue baggy trousers, and a red fez with a tassel
nearly a yard long, while a connoisseur's mouth would have watered at
the sight of his antique silver watch-chain with its exquisitely worked
hanging blobs.

The interior of the house gave an impression of vast roominess. Wide
stairs, a huge upper landing like a reception-room, a panelled
drawing-room large enough to lose one's self in, ornamented by primitive
frescoes on the walls above the panels.

The English consul was an old Albanian gentleman with delightful
manners. For a long time he had been suffering from an illness which had
started from a wound in the head, received during the siege of Scutari.
After the inevitable coffee and cigarettes his son wandered out with us
and showed us the interesting parts of the town. Out of a big doorway
came two women in gorgeous clothes. They had been paying a morning call,
and bade farewell to their hostess. Doubtless they were mother and
daughter.

One was faded and beautiful; the younger was of the plump cream and
roses variety with modestly downcast eyes. Both wore enormous white lace
Mary Queen of Scots' veils, great baggy trousers made of stiff shiny
black stuff, which was gathered into hard gold embroidered pipes which
encased the ankles and upwards. These pipes were so stiff that they had
to walk with straight knees and feet far apart. Their full cavalier
coats were thickly covered with many kilometres of black braid sewn on
in curly patterns, and the girl wore at least a hundred golden coins
hung in semicircles on her chest.

They left the third woman at the door and walked back a few steps down
the road, then turned, and laying hand on breast, bowed ceremoniously,
first the mother, then the daughter, who never lifted her eyes; another
twenty steps and again the same performance; still once more, after
which they slowly waddled round the corner. Suma told us they wore the
costume of the _haute bourgeoisie_, and probably the girl had been taken
to see her future mother-in-law.

The next vision that met our eyes was the doctor in his best clothes,
frock-coat, white spats, gloves, and a minute pork-pie cap perched on
the top of his spherical countenance.

"In Scutari it is necessary that I should be _en tenue_," was his
explanation.

Suma parted with us, promising to take us to the bazaar the next day,
and we spent the afternoon sketching and avoiding a dumb idiot who tried
to amuse us by standing on his head in front of whatever object we chose
to sketch, and at intervals thrust into our hands a letter which he
thought was a money producing talisman. It said in English, "Kick this
chap if he bothers you."

There are other traces of the English soldiery here. Little children
with outstretched hands flock round, saying in coaxing tones "Garn," or
"Git away you," under the impression that they are saying "please."

At a street corner we saw a professional beggar, a shattered man of
drooping misery, his rags vieing with the colour of the road. Jo began
to sketch, but he promptly sat up, twirled his long moustaches, and from
a worm became a lion. One may be a beggar in Albania, but as long as one
has moustaches one is at least a man.

The bazaar next day filled our wildest dreams. Queerly clad peasants of
all tribes came down from the mountains bearing rugs, rubbish, white
cloths, cheese, honey, poultry, pigs, and they sat on the ground behind
their wares in the blazing heat, while all the rest of Northern Albania
came to purchase. The little shops set out their pottery, silver-ware
and brightly striped veils. Jo lifted up a woman's leather belt covered
with silver, thinking how nice it would look on a modern skirt; but she
dropped it with a crash, for the leather was a quarter of an inch thick,
and the silver equally weighty.

Veiled women bargained and chaffered with the rest, some dressed in
white with black chiffon covering their faces, and others still more
bizarre, wore flowered chiffon, one large flower perhaps covering the
area of one cheek and nose.

More fanatic in religion than their men, they objected to being
sketched, crouching to the ground and covering themselves completely
with draperies, so we had to desist.

There can be no arguments about beauty in these lands. It goes by
"volume."

Put the ladies on the scales, and in case of a tie, measure them round
the hips.

Vendors pressed gold-embroidered zouaves, antique arms and filigree
silver-ware upon us; but we ever looked elsewhere, and Jo suddenly
pounced on a handkerchief, or rather a conglomeration of bits sewn
together, each being a remnant of brilliant coloured patterned stuff.

"But that has no value," said Suma, smiling.

"Never mind, I shall wear it as a hat," said Jo; and Suma, somewhat
perplexed, lowered his dignity and bargained for it.

We next saw a brilliantly striped rug hanging on the wall behind an old
woman, red, green, yellow, black and white, just what we wanted. She
consented to take thirteen silver cronen for it, but no Montenegrin
paper. She explained she was poor. She had brought up the sheep, spun
and dyed the wool, and had woven the beautiful thing, and now she wanted
silver because outside Scutari, in which the Montenegrins forced
acceptance of their notes by corporal punishment, paper was worth
nothing. To get the silver we went into a general store and sold a
sovereign.

[Illustration: JO AND MR. SUMA IN THE SCUTARI BAZAAR.]

While we were waiting for the money-changer, two Miridite women came in.
They had short hair dyed black, white coarse linen chemises with
large sleeves, embroidered zouaves, white skirts with front and back
aprons lavishly embroidered, striped trousers, and stockings knitted on
great diagonal patterns.

One of them told Suma that their village was in possession of Essad
Pacha, that all their husbands had fled, and were still fighting in the
hills.

Suma, for a joke, asked her what she thought of Jo. Passing her eyes
over Jo's uninflated frame, she hesitated, but was urged to speak the
truth.

"I think she is forty," she remarked; and then somehow Jo was not quite
pleased.

The midday heat being overwhelming we took a cab and drove back along
two kilometres of dusty road. A veiled woman stopped the coachman,
asking him to give her tired little girl a lift. Jehu refused, through
awe of us; but we insisted on taking her, and begged the woman to come
in too. Jo held out her hands, but the woman shrank back horrified,
though obviously worn out with the heat.

"That is a pity," laughed Suma. "I hoped she would do it. It would have
been a new experience for me."

Jo confided to him her burning desire to enter a harem, but as he had no
Mahommedan friends he thought the possibility remote.

Two more bourgeois women passed. Jan photographed them, but not before
they hid their faces with umbrellas. Even the Christian men are
intensely jealous, and their women have some Turkish ideals. We spent
the afternoon sketching outside a barber's shop, coffee being brought to
us on a hanging tray with a little fire on it to keep the coffee warm.
Opposite was a shop which combined the trades of blacksmith and
fishmonger. It seemed the strangest mixture.

We dined with the Frenchman. He was a queer fellow, seeming only
interested in economies, his digestion and his old age; and he discussed
the possible places where an old man might live in comfort. Egypt, he
dismissed: too hot, and an old man does not want to travel. The Greek
islands had earthquakes. Corfu, he had heard, was depressing; while in
the Canaries there was sometimes a wind and one might catch cold. We
suggested "heaven," and he looked hurt. He had been in Scutari in
December. He told us that after dark it was impossible to walk down the
great main street, which divides Christian from Turk, without carrying a
lighted lantern to signal that you were not on nefarious intent, or you
might be shot.

[Illustration: CHRISTIAN WOMEN HIDING FROM THE PHOTOGRAPHER.]

[Illustration: SCUTARI--BAZAAR AND OLD VENETIAN FORTRESS.]

Mr. Suma came along the next day in good time and gave Jan a letter for
the Count de Salis. We bade him a most cordial farewell, assuring him
prophetically that we should revisit Scutari--little did we dream in
what circumstances,--and he said we would then see the "Maison Pigit," a
show castle which he had, in vain, urged us to visit. Paget was an
Englishman who seems to have spent ten or twelve years dreaming away
life in Scutari, and collecting ancient weapons. With the outbreak of
the South African war he disappeared. He was then heard of fighting for
the Turk against the Italian, and later for the Turk against the Balkan
alliance. He has never returned.

With Dr. Ob we drove to the quay, on the road passing an old woman
staggering along beneath the weight of a complete iron and brass
bedstead.

As we got out of our carriage we noticed a rabble of Turks hurrying
towards us. In its midst was a brougham with windows tight shut and
veiled, from which we guessed that some light of the harem was to be a
fellow passenger. The carriage halted, and whatever was within was
hustled from the farthest door and in the midst of the dense mob of men
hurried down the quay. The side of the steamer was crowded with craft,
so we passed beneath the stern to embark on the far side, to find that
the Turkish lady and her escort had passed beneath the bows for a
similar purpose. We caused a flutter, the beauty was hastily lifted on
board like a bale of goods, and we caught a glimpse of magnificent pink
brocaded trousers and jewelled shoes beneath her red orange covering.
Two women--one a Christian--followed, and when she was seated, bent over
her as a sort of screen to hide even her clothes from the gaze of the
naughty infidel.

Governor Petrovitch came down to the quay to bid us good-bye. With him
came his daughter, who was returning with us. She had nothing
interesting to say about Scutari. The Frenchman had brought with him a
cook whom he had engaged to look after his digestion.

We found comfortable seats on a long box with a bale as a back rest, and
the governor sent two chairs for the ladies. As we steamed away we
pondered on the problem of Scutari.

There are in all, say, 300,000 Serbs, a high estimate, in all
Montenegro. The population of the Sanjak and its cities, Plevlie, Ipek,
Berane, and Jakovitza, are of course largely Mussulman or Albanian, and
already the balance of people in the little mountain kingdom is
wavering. If Montenegro adds to herself Scutari, a town in which the
Serb population is practically "nil," the scales swing over heavily
against the ruling classes, and either one will see Montenegro absorb
Scutari, to be in turn absorbed by Scutari itself; or we shall see
the crimes of Austro-Hungary repeated upon a smaller scale, and
Montenegro will be some day condemned before a tribunal of Europe for
continued injustice to the people entrusted to her. The Albanians loathe
the Serb even more than they hate the Turk, and at present, in spite of
the fact that they are on their best manners, the Montenegrin police and
soldiery have the appearance of a debt collector in the house of one who
has backed a friend's bill.

[Illustration: DISEMBARKATION OF A TURKISH BRIDE.]

[Illustration: GOVERNOR PETROVITCH AND HIS DAUGHTER IN THEIR STATE
BARGE.]

An Albanian noble said to Jan, "We are quiet now: the Powers have no
time to waste upon us, and we are not going to revolt and let ourselves
be murdered without redress. But, if after the war things are not
righted, monsieur, there will be a revolution every day."

We saw a pelican, and of course some one had to try and kill it; but
luckily the criminal was an average shot only. The pelican flew off
flapping its broad white wings. The Frenchman told us that the Turkish
lady round the corner is a gipsy bride to be. A light dawned upon us.
The bed, these boxes we were sitting upon: she was taking her furniture
with her. Jan peered round at her. She was sitting on a low stool, and
the two screens were standing at duty. They had chosen the most secluded
spot in the boat, which was next to the boilers. The day itself was very
hot, and the atmosphere within the poor bride's thick coverings must
have been awful, though when nobody was looking she was allowed to raise
for a second the many thicknesses of black chiffon which shrouded her
face, and to gasp a few chestfulls of fresh air.

Dr. Ob suddenly produced a large sheep's head which he dissected with
medical knowledge. He gouged out an eye which he offered to Jo; upon her
refusing the succulent morsel he gave a sigh of relief and wolfed it
himself. One of the men on board had a fiddle, and played us across the
lake. Some one said, "Give us the Merry Widow."

He shook his head.

"Come on," said his tempter, "there's no one here. Give it us." At last,
looking at Miss Petrovitch and us, the musician timidly started the
music, for the "Merry Widow" is "straffed" in Montenegro as one of the
characters is a caricature of Prince Danilo, hence everybody plays it
with gusto in private.

We came again to Plavnitza. A huge crowd of Turks were waiting for us;
one wild befezzed ruffian had a concertina and was capering to his own
strains.

We were suddenly disturbed, the box was wrested away, the bundles also,
the bed was carried off, also a tin dish too small for a bath, too big
for a basin, and a tin watering pot--the bride's trousseau. The bride
was seized by two men, her brothers we were told, and carried up the
stairs to a waiting brougham, the trousseau was piled upon a bullock
cart, and shouting and singing and dancing the _cortège_ moved out of
sight.

At Virbazar the steamer could not come to the quay, so the authorities
ran a five-inch rounded tree trunk from the boat to the mud. Many dared
the perilous crossing, and one nearly fell into the water. Dr. Ob was
furious, and at last a plank was substituted. Then we found that the
only way off the mud was by clambering round a corner of wall on some
shaky stepping stones. Dr. Ob fumed, his little round face grew rounder,
his moustache went up and down, he threatened everybody with instant
execution, like the Red Queen in "Alice." Then he found that no motor
was awaiting us. He rushed to the telephone while we had a belated
lunch. No motors; one was out taking the Serbian officers for a
joy-ride; Prince Peter had taken the other to Antivari. Montenegro
seemed to have no more. We soothed ourselves with "American" grapes.
This grape tastes not unlike strawberries and cream, but not having the
same sentimental associations, does not come off quite as well. We heard
a motor coming. Dr. Ob ran out to intercept it. It was crammed. Then
the telephone boy brought a message that Prince Peter's motor would not
return till to-morrow.

Miss Petrovitch wrung her hands.

"We cannot stay here the night," she said.

"Are the bugs awful?" we asked.

"It's not the bugs, it's those dreadful women," she answered. "We shall
all be murdered in our beds."

Now the women appeared to us most inoffensive.

Dr. Ob was purple with rage. He stamped his foot.

"But I am a minister," he kept repeating crescendo, till he shouted to
the villagers, "But I am a minister."

It is impossible to take Montenegro seriously. Situations occur at every
corner which remind one irresistibly of "the Rose and the Ring," and we
wondered what would happen next. There were other belated passengers who
had hoped for conveyance, and the Frenchman's carriage had not turned
up. Dr. Ob at last decided to commandeer a cocked hat boat rowed by four
women with which to navigate the river to Rieka, and thence by carriage
to Cettinje if carriages came. It was six p.m., we might reach Rieka by
ten.

We rowed out through the half-sunken trees. At the end of a spit of land
was a man gnawing a piece of raw beef. We shouted to him to ask what he
was doing; and he answered that he was curing his malaria. The two women
in the bow were very pretty, one was a mere child.

There were wisps of sunset cloud in the sky, and soon night came quite
down.

As it grew dark all sense of motion disappeared. The boat shrugged
uneasily with the movement of the oars, the rowlocks made of loops of
twisted osier creaked, but one could not perceive that one was going
forwards. The hills lost their solidity, becoming mere holes in the grey
blue of the sky, a bright planet made a light smudge on the ruffled
water in which the stars could not reflect. As we crept forwards into
the river and the mountains closed in, the water became more calm, and
the stars came out one by one beneath us, while in the ripple of our
wake the image of the planet ran up continuously in strings of little
golden balls like a juggling trick.

The Frenchman turned his head and made a noise like the rowlocks. "Il
faut chanter quand même," he explained, "pour encourager les autres." Jo
then started "Frère Jacques." Jan and Dr. Ob took it up till the
Frenchman burst in with an entirely different time and key. Then one of
the oar girls began a queer little melody on four notes only, and all
the four women joined, one end of the boat answering the other. They
sang through their noses, and high up in the falsetto. By shutting one's
eyes one could imagine a great ox waggon drawn uphill by four bullocks
and one of the wheels ungreased. Yet it was not unpleasing, this queer
shrill, recurrent rhythm, the monotonous creak and splash of the oars,
the mystery of feeling one's way in the blue gloom, through reed and
water-lily beds, up this cliff-bound river, and far away the faint
twitter--also recurrent and monotonous--of some nightjar....

The night grew bitterly cold on the water. One of our passengers, a
little Russian dressmaker, had malaria and shivered with ague. Jo gave
her her cloak. The Frenchman's cook was unsuitably dressed, for she had
on but a thin chiffon blouse. We ourselves had summer clothes, and we
were all mightily glad to see the glare of Rieka in the sky.

Our luck be praised, there were two old carriages with older horses, and
another for the Frenchman. We supped moderately at a restaurant kept by
an Austrian, and still shivering scrambled into the carriages. We had no
lights, but the road was visible by the stars.

We went up and up, up the same road down which we had come three days
before. Below one could see strange planes of different darknesses, but
not any shape, and soon one was too aware of physical discomfort to
notice the night. Besides, one had had enough of night. Miss Petrovitch
told the boy to hurry up the horses; he beat them; she then rebuked him
for beating them. After a while the boy grew tired of her contradictory
orders, and lying down on the box fell fast asleep. The poor old horses
plodded along. To right and left were immense precipices, but nobody
seemed to care.

We reached Cettinje about two a.m., found the hotel open, and a room
ready for us, and in spite of our frozen limbs were soon asleep.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER X

THE HIGHWAY OF MONTENEGRO


We went next day to see the doctor, who was late, so we strolled out to
the market. They were selling grapes and figs, fresh walnuts, and lots
of little dried fish, strung on to rings of willow, from the lake of
Scutari. The scene, with the men in their costumes of red and blue, the
women all respectably dressed in long embroidered coats of pale blue or
white, and the village idiot, a man prancing about dressed in nothing
but a woman's overall, was very gay. We caught the doctor later. He was
talking with a Mrs. G----, an Englishwoman, from the hospital at
Podgoritza: she was trying to hustle him as one hustles the butcher who
has belated the meat. The doctor had let up his efforts since his orgy
of respectability in Scutari, and his beard and whiskers were enjoying a
half-inch holiday from the razor. With him was a Slav-Hungarian, who
recommended us to go home by Gussigne, Plav and Ipek, the best scenery
in all Montenegro he said; he himself had just returned from Scutari,
whence he had advanced with a Montenegrin army halfway across Albania.
At each village the natives had fled, burying their corn and driving off
their cattle, leaving the villages deserted, and the army, starving, had
at last been forced to retire. Dr. Ob promised us a motor by four, but
added that they had no oil and very little benzine. Then growing more
confidential, he took us by the buttonholes and asked us to use our best
influence with the Count de Salis, and request him to tell the Admiralty
to allow petrol to be brought up from Salonika, where the British had
laid an embargo upon it. He promised pathetically that _all_ the petrol
would be brought up overland.

Intensely amused by the doctor's idea of our importance, we solemnly
delivered his message to the Count.

We went to the Serbian Minister, a charming man with a freebooter's
face, for our passports, and then back to Dr. Ob. The motor was going
off at 6.30 he said. We cheered internally, for we were getting tired of
Cettinje, which reminded us of a watchmaker's wife with her best silk
dress on. On our way downstairs we called in to thank the Minister of
War for our jolly trip; and he wished us "Bon voyage."

We got en route almost up to time, with us was Mrs. G----, who was also
going back as far as Podgoritza. She was storekeeper and accountant for
the Wounded Allies, and ever had a hard and troublesome task between
what she needed and what she could get from the Sanitary Department. She
took the front seat with Jo, and inside Jan found a French sailor of the
wireless telegraphy, who had had typhoid fever, but was now going back
to work. As we rattled down the curves and along the edge of the
darkening chasms of the mountain side, he summed up with the brevity of
a "rapin."

"Dans la journée ici, vous savez, il y'a de quoi faire des clichés."

We stopped at Rieka for water, and then on once more. In the glare of
our headlights, little clumps of soldiers, with donkeys loaded with the
new uniforms, loomed suddenly out of the darkness. Once a donkey took
fright and bolted back, and the soldier in charge yelled and pointed his
rifle at us. If we had moved he would have shot without compunction.
Later the men had bivouacked, and all along the rest of the road we
passed little fires of fresh brushwood, the sparks pouring up like
fountains into the night, round which the soldiers and drivers were
sitting and singing their weird songs.

At Podgoritza we found Dr. Lilias Hamilton at supper with her staff. She
has had rather a hard time. The hospital was intended for Ipek, but for
some reason, although there were wounded in the town, the Montenegrins
decided to move it to Podgoritza, where there were none. After a
difficult journey across the mountains they settled down, but could
never get sufficient transport from the Government to bring their stores
over, except in small quantities. They started to work, but as there
were few soldiers to treat, Dr. Lilias, being a lady, interested herself
in the Turkish female population, a thing which the Montenegrins thought
a criminal waste of time, and tried to stop.

We got a bedroom in the hotel, and tired out, tried to sleep; but the
occupants of the café began a set of howling songs, very unmusical, and
kept us awake till past twelve. We have never heard this kind of singing
anywhere else.

Next day we crossed the river and explored the quaint and beautiful
streets of the Turkish quarter. The people are equally offensive on both
sides of the town; however, Podgoritza seems to be the White-chapel of
Montenegro--and we finally had to take refuge in the sheds of the French
wireless telegraphy. The commandant at the motor depôt again treated us
rudely, but the Prefect was nice, this time. He promised us a carriage
on the morrow if no motor were forthcoming.

After supper the people began the awful howling songs; also there was a
wild orchestra which had one clarinet for melody and about ten deep
bass trumpets for accompaniment.

Next morning no carriage came, so off to the Prefect. He promised one
"odmah," which being translated is "at once," but means really within
"eight or nine hours." We waited. Nine a.m. passed. Ten a.m. went by. A
small boy sneaked up and tried to sell some contraband tobacco; but Jan
had just bought "State." An angry Turkish gentleman came and said that
his horses had been requisitioned to take us to Andrievitza, and that we
weren't going to get them till one o'clock, because he was using them.
We returned to the Prefect, not to complain--oh no--but to ask him to
telegraph to Andrievitza that we were coming. He was naturally surprised
to see us again, and explanations followed. A very humbled and much
better tempered Turk came to the café to say that the horses would be
with us "odmah."

A drizzle had been falling all the morning; at last the carriage came.
Our driver was a wretched half-starved, high-cheeked Moslem in rags,
whose trousers were only made draught proof by his sitting on the holes.
He tried to squeeze another passenger upon us; but we were wiser, and
were just not able to understand what he was saying. Our Turk's method
of driving was to tie the reins to the carriage rail, flourishing a whip
and shouting with vigour; every ten minutes he glanced uneasily
backwards to see that nothing had broken loose or come away.

The valley we entered had been very deep, but at some period had been
half filled by a deposit of sand and pebble which had hardened into a
crumbling rock. We were driving over the gravelly shelf, above our head
rose walls of limestone, and deep below was the river which had eaten
the softer agglomerate into a hundred fantastic caverns. All along the
road we passed groups of tramping volunteers fresh from America with
store clothes and suitcases; the sensible were also festooned with
boots. It was pretty cold sitting in the carriage, and it grew colder as
we mounted.

At last we halted to rest the horses at a café. The influence of "Pod"
was heavy still. A group of grumpy people were sitting around a fire
built in the middle of the floor; they did not greet us--which is
unusual in Montenegro--but continued the favourite Serb recreation of
spitting. In the centre of them was an old man on a chair, also
expectorating, and by his side one older and scraggier, his waistcoat
covered with snuff and medals, palpitated in a state of senile decay,
holding in a withered hand a palmfull of snuff which he had forgotten to
inhale. There were a lot of women saying nothing and spitting. A sour,
hard-faced woman admitted that there was coffee.

Jo, trying to cheer things up a bit, said brightly--

"Is it far to Andrievitza?"

A woman mumbled, "Far, bogami."

Jo again: "It is cold on the road."

A long silence, broken with the sound of spitting, followed. At last a
woman in the darkest corner murmured--

"Cold, bogami."

It was like the opening of a Maeterlinckian play, but we gave it up,
sipped our coffee, and when we had finished, fled outside into the cold
which, after all, was warmer than these people's welcome. Outside we met
a young man who spoke German, and as he wanted to show off, he stopped
to converse. We were joined by an older man who claimed to be his
father. The father was really a jolly old boy. He said his son was a
puny weakling, but as for himself he never had had a doctor in his life.
So Jan tried his mettle with a cigar. An officer, a filthy old peasant
in the remains of a battered uniform, joined the group, but he was not
charming; however, Jan offered him a cigarette. The old yokel rushed on
his fate. He said--

"Cigarettes are all very well; but I would rather have one of those you
gave to the other fellow."

The road wound on and up in the usual way, rain came down at intervals,
and it grew colder and colder. At last we extracted all our spare
clothes from the knapsack and put them on. We reached the top of the
pass and began to rattle down the descent on the further side, and we
kept our spirits up, in the growing gloom, by singing choruses: "The old
Swanee river" and "Uncle Ned."

We pulled up at dusk at a dismal hovel, on piles, with rickety wooden
stairs leading to a dimly lighted balcony over which fell deep wooden
eaves.

"Is this Jabooka?" we asked, for we had been told to alight at Jabooka.

"No," said the driver; "we cannot reach Jabooka to-night. But here are
fine beds, fine, fine, fine!"

We climbed in. The rooms were whitewashed and looked all right, but
there was a funny smell. We shall know what it means a second time.
There was a crowd of American Montenegrin volunteers in the kitchen. One
gay fellow was in a bright green dressing-gown like overcoat: he said
that his wife--a hard-featured woman who looked as if nobody loved
her--had brought his saddle horse. We got some hard-boiled eggs and
maize bread. Maize bread is always a little gritty, for it has in its
substance no binding material, but when it is well cooked and has plenty
of crust is quite eatable. French cooking is far away, however, and the
bread is usually a sort of soggy, half-baked flabby paste, most
unpalatable and most indigestible. Here was the worst bread we yet had
found.

They took us down a dark passage, in which huge lumps of raw meat
hanging from the walls struck one's hand with a chill, flabby caress as
one passed. In our room, four benches were arranged into a pair of
widish couches; mattresses were given us and coarse hand-woven rugs. We
were then left. But we could not sleep; somehow lice were in one's mind,
and at last Jan awoke and lit the tiny oil lamp. He immediately slew a
bug; then another; then a whopper; then one escaped; then Jo got one. In
desperation we got up, smeared ourselves with paraffin, and lay down
again in a dismal distressed doze till morning.

Our driver was a dilatory dog: we had said that we would leave at five
a.m., and at six he was washing his teeth in the little stream which
acted as the village sewer. As we were waiting our green-coated friend
got away on his saddle horse, with his wife walking at its tail; the
other Americans climbed into a great three-horse waggon, dragged their
suit-cases after them, and off they went. We left nearer seven than six.
The air was chilly, and though there were bits of blue in the sky, the
hills were floating in mist, and there was a sharp shower. There were
more groups of Americans trudging along, and also a fair number of
peasants, the women, as usual, dignified and beautiful. Very hungry we
at last came to Jabooka. A jolly woman--we were getting away from
"Pod"--welcomed us and dragged us into the kitchen. She asked Jo many
questions, one being, "What relation is he to you, that man with whom
you travel?" The fire on the floor was nearly out, but she rained sticks
on to it, blew up the great central log, which is the backbone, into a
blaze, and soon the smoke was pouring into our eyes and filtering up
amongst the hams in the roof. We were drinking a splendid café au lait
when an old woman peered in at the door.

"Very beautiful Jabooka," she said.

We agreed heartily.

"Not dear either," she said.

We expressed surprise.

"You can buy cheap," she went on.

We regretted that we did not wish to.

"But you must eat to live," she protested.

We intimated that this was of the nature of a truism, but failed to see
the connection.

"But look at them," she expostulated, holding out a large basket of
apples; and we suddenly remembered that "Jabooka" means also apples, and
realized that she was not a land agent.

Then on once more. In the deep valleys were large modern sawmills, but
the houses were ever poor, and the windows grew smaller and smaller and
were without glass. At the junction of the Kolashin road, from the
north, we picked up a jolly Montenegrin with a big dog. He was a driver
by profession, and he hurried our lethargic progress a little. Then the
front spring broke. It was mended with wire and a piece of tree; when we
started again the reins snapped.

We halted once more at a café filled with Americans; some had only left
their native land six months agone, yet to the peasant they were all
"Americans." Some of them seemed very dissatisfied with the reception
which they had received, and we don't wonder. "In Ipek I coulden get my
room," said one, "tho' I 'ad wired for 't, 'cause one o' them 'airy
popes [Greek priests] 'ad come wid 'is fambly. I 'ad to sleep like a
'og, you fellers, jess like a 'og." We had been under the impression
that burning patriotism had called all these men back to their country,
but one sturdy fellow disabused us.

"No, you fellers," he said, "there weren't no work for us in 'Murrica.
Mos' o' the places 'ad closed down ter a shift or two at the mos' per
wik. And fer fellers wats used to livin' purty well there weren't enough
ter pay board alone. We gotter come or we'd a starved." Of course this
was not true of many.

On again, rain and sun alternating, but still we were cold, feet
especially.

These mountains, these continual groups of slouching, slouch-hatted
"Americans," these little weathered log cabins, falling streams, and
pine trees reminded one of some tale of Bret Harte, and one found one's
self expecting the sudden appearance of Broncho Billy or Jack Hamlin
mounted upon a fiery mustang. But we cleared the top of the pass without
meeting either, and started on our last long downhill to Andrievitza.
Cheered by the rapidity of our motion the two ruffians on the box
started a howling Podgoritzian kind of melody, exceedingly discordant.
The driver, careless that one of our springs was but wired tree, and
that wheels in Montenegro are easily decomposed, flogged his horses
unmercifully, rattling along the extreme edge of one hundred foot
precipices. We stopped at a café for the driver to get coffee; rattled
on again, stopped to inquire the price of hay; more rattle; stopped for
the driver to say, "How de doo" to a pal; more rattle; stopped to ask a
man if his dog has had puppies yet.... But we protested.

Andrievitza was the prettiest village we had yet seen in Montenegro,
and was full of more "Americans." In the street a small boy urged us to
go to "Radoikovitches," but we went to the hotel. The hotel was full,
because a Pasha from Scutari had arrived with his three wives, and all
their families. So we permitted the little yellow-haired urchin to lead
us to "Radoikovitches." A woman received us, without gusto, till she
learned that Jo was Jan's wife, when she cheered up. A charming old
officer stood rakia all round in our honour. The mayor came in to greet
us, and we felt that at last Pod had been pushed behind for ever.

The mayor was a pleasant fellow, speaking French, and he confided in us
that he was suffering from a "maladie d'estomac." When we thought we had
sympathized enough, we asked him how far it was, and could we have
horses to go to Petch. He answered that it was two days, or rather one
and a half, and that the horses would await us at twelve on the
following day. We went to bed early to make up for last night, but Jan,
having felt rather tickly all day, hunted the corners of his shirt and
found--dare we mention it--a louse, souvenir de Liéva Riéka.

As we were breakfasting next day our driver, who had been most
unpleasant the whole time, sidled up and asked Jan to sign a paper.
While Jan was doing so the driver burst into a volley of explanations.
We thought that he was asking for a tip, but made out that he had lost
(or gambled) the ten kronen which his employer had given to him for
expenses. We had intended to give him no tip, for on the yesterday he
had refused to carry our bags, but this made us waver. We asked Mr. Rad,
etc., what we should do.

"Sign his paper," he answered gruffly, "and kick him out; he's only a
dirty Turk anyhow."

The mayor sent our horses round early; but we stuck to our decision to
start in the afternoon, and ordered lunch at twelve. There was a huge
crowd gathered in front of the inn, and we saw that the Pasha and his
harem were off. One wife wore a blue furniture cover over her, one a
green, and one a brown, so that he might know them apart from the
outside, for they all had heavy black veils before their faces. The
Pasha himself seemed rather a decent fellow, and had much of the air of
a curate conducting a school feast. Four children were thrust into two
baskets which were slung on each side of one small horse, and various
furniture, including a small bath (or large basin), was strapped on to
others, and the Pasha followed by his wives set off walking, the Pasha
occasionally throwing a graceful remark behind him.

The mayor lunched with us, and for a man who has, as he says, anæmia of
the stomach, chronic dysentery, and inflammation of the intestines, he
ate most freely, and if such is his daily habit, he deserved all he had
got.

Our guide was the most picturesque we have yet had. He was an Albanian
with a shaven poll save for a tuft by which the angels will one day lift
him to heaven, small white cap like a saucer, over which was wound a
twisted dirty white scarf, short white coat heavily embroidered with
black braid, tight trousers, also heavily embroidered, but the waistband
only pulled up to where the buttock begins to slide away--we wondered
continuously why they never fell off--and the long space between coat
and trousers filled with tightly wound red and orange belt. He called
himself Ramases, or some such name. Our saddles were pretty good, the
stirrups like shovels, the horses the best (barring at the Front) we had
had since Prepolji.

We rode over a creaky bridge, Jan's horse refusing, so he went through
the river, and out into the new road which is being made to Ipek. Men
and women, almost all in Albanian costumes, were scraping, digging,
drilling and blasting; some of the women wore a costume we had not yet
seen, very short cotton skirt above the knees, and long, embroidered
leggings. We passed this high-road "in posse" and, the little horses
stepping along, presently caught up a trail of donkeys, the proprietor
of which, a friend of Ramases, had a face like a post-impressionist
sculpture.

We passed the donkeys and came to the usual sort of café, rough log hut,
fire on floor--but one of the women therein gave Jo her only
apple--decidedly we were away from Pod.

On again along river valleys. Jan's saddle had a knob in the seat that
began to insinuate. On every hill were cut maize patches, the red
stubble in the sunset looking like fields of blood.

In the dusk we came to Velika, a wooden witchlike village, where we were
to stay the night, and where, as we had expected, the Pasha, ten minutes
ahead of us, had commandeered all the accommodation. The captain,
however, was very good, and gave us a policeman to find lodgings for us.
By this time it was dark. He led us into a pitch black lane where the
mud came over our boots, then we clambered up a loose earth cliff and
stood looking into a room whose only light was from a small fire, as
usual on the floor. Over the fire was a large pot, and a meagre-faced
woman was stirring the brew. Behind her a small baby in a red and white
striped blanket was pushed up to its armpits through a hole on four
legs, where it hung. In a dark corner a small boy was worrying a black
cat.

"Can you give these English a bed?" demanded the policeman.

The woman shook her head sadly. "Mozhe," she said, which means "It is
possible."

After supper, Bovril and cheese omelette, we went out to seek the café.
We trudged back through the mud and stumbled into a house full of
lattice work, like a Chinese store. Startled we tried another. This time
we came into a stable, but there was a ladder leading upwards, and at
the top a lighted room, so we decided to explore. We climbed up and came
into a large loft in which six long legged, heavily bearded Albanians
were squatting about a fire; a gipsy woman with wild tousled hair and
hanging breasts was in the corner of the hearth, and was telling some
long monotonous tale. An Albanian, who spoke Serb, told us to come in
and have coffee. It was like the illustration of some tale from the
Arabian Nights. After a while we climbed out again into the night, and
went home. Ramases hung about shyly, and the woman explained that he had
nowhere to sleep; so we arranged that she should house him also.

Even as we poked our noses out of the door there was a promise of a fine
day. Below us we could see the Pasha up and superintending the packing
of his family and furniture. We celebrated by opening our last tin of
jam, which we had carried carefully all the way, waiting for an
occasion. We left the remains of the jam for the small family, and as we
were mounting we saw their faces smeared and streaked with "First
Quality Damson." We started the climb almost at once. The early morning
smoke filtering through the slats made an outer cone, of faint blue,
above the black roof of every hut and cottage; here and there were
traces of roadmaking, groups of Albanian workmen on stretches of
levelled earth which our trail crossed at irregular intervals. Presently
we entered the clouds, and were wrapped about with a thin mist faintly
smelling of smoke. After a while we climbed above them, and looking down
could see the clouds mottling all the landscape, and through holes
little patches of sunlit field or wood peering through like the eyes of
a Turkish woman through her yashmak.

Our horses panted and sweated up the long and arduous slope for two
mortal hours, up and ever up; but all things come to an end, and at last
we reached the top. We sat down to rest our weary animals and, lo! by us
passed long strings of mules and ponies bearing the very benzine about
which so much fuss had been made in Cettinje. Alas for our reputations
as miracle workers! Had this blessed stuff only come a week later we
should even have passed in Montenegro as first cousins of the king at
least; but this was a little too prompt.

There was landscape enough here for any budding Turners, but we two had
still eight hours to go and not money enough to loiter. On the higher
peaks of the mountains there was already a fresh powdering of snow; in
the valleys the clouds had almost cleared away, leaving a thin film of
moisture which made shadows of pure ultramarine beneath the trees. Your
modern commercial grinder cannot sell you this colour, it needs some of
that pure jewel powder which old Swan kept in a bottle for use on his
masterpiece, but found never a subject noble enough. Some of that stuff
prepared from the receipt of old Cennino Cennini which ends "this is a
work, fine and delicate, suitable for the hands of young maidens, but
beware of old women." Pure Lapis Lazuli.

[Illustration: THE IPEK PASS IN WINTER.]

But it became difficult even for us to admire landscape, for breakfast
had disappeared within us, and lunch seemed far away, so once more
recourse to the "compressed luncheon." There are three stages in the
taste of the "Tabloid." Stage one, when it smacks of glue; stage two,
when it has a flavour of inferior beef tea, say 11.30 a.m.; stage three,
when it resembles nothing but the gravy of the most delicious beef
steak. That is about 2.30, and your lunch some hours in retard. We
had reached stage three, and even Jo succumbed to the charms of the
"Tab."

Famished we came to a café.

"Eggs?" we gasped to the host.

"Nema" (haven't got any), he replied.

"Milk?"

"Nema."

"Cheese?" crescendo.

"Nema."

"Bread?" fortissimo.

"Nema."

Despairing we swallowed three more luncheon tablets each and whined for
tea. Ramases, who seemed to get along on tea alone, promised us a
well-stocked café in an hour and a half.

The second café was purely Albanian. We climbed up some rickety stairs
into a room which had--strange to relate--a fireplace. About the room
was a sleeping dais where three or four black and white ruffians were
couched. There was a little window with a deep seat into which we
squeezed and loudly demanded eggs, bread and cheese. An old woman all
rags and tatters came in and squeezed up alongside, where she crouched,
spinning a long wool thread and staring up into Jo's face. Several cats
were lounging about the room, but one came close and began to squirm as
though she were "setting" a mouse. Suddenly she pounced, seized the old
woman's food bag from her feet, swept it on to the floor, and
disappeared with it beneath the dais, where all the rest of the cats
followed. The old woman, who had been plying distaff and spindle the
while, let out a yell of fury and half disappeared beneath the platform.
We all roared with laughter, while beneath us the cats spat and the old
woman cursed, beating about with the handle of her distaff till she had
rescued her dinner. She backed out with the bag, sat down again and
started spinning once more as though nothing had happened.

Beyond this café the track became very stony and rough. We passed a
typical couple. The man was carrying a light bag full of bottles, while
the women had on her back a huge wooden chest, in which things rattled
and bumped as she stumped along.

Jo looked at her with pity. "That's heavy," she said.

The woman stared stupidly and answered nothing; but the man smiled and
said--

"Yes, heavy. Bogami."

We passed more caravans of that all too soon benzine. Cliffs began to
tower up on every side, and precipices to fall away beneath our feet to
a greenish roaring torrent; great springs spouted from the rocks and
dashed down upon the stones below in shredded foam: one was pink in
colour. Here once a general and his lady were riding, and the lady's
horse slipped. The general grasped her but lost his own balance, and
both fell into the river and were killed. The track wound up and down,
often very slippery underfoot, and the horses, shod with the usual flat
plates of iron, were slithering and sliding on the edge of the
precipices. At last we got off and walked. It was an immense relief: our
saddles were intensely hard, stirrups unequal lengths, and with knots
which rubbed unmercifully on the shins. We passed a man who was
evidently an Englishman, and he stared at us as we passed, but neither
stopped. The gorge grew deeper, the stream more rapid. The cliffs
towered higher, black and grey in huge perpendicular stripes. We heard
sounds of thunder or of blasting which reverberated in the canyon; it
was oppressive and gloomy, and one shuddered to think what it would be
like if an earthquake occurred. The cliffs ceased abruptly in a huge
grass slope on which crowds of people were working on the new road; we
crossed the river over a wooden bridge.

We came down into Ipek suddenly, past the old orange towered monastery,
which lies, its outer walls half buried, keeping the landslides at bay.
Ramases, who had suddenly put on another air, flung his leg over the
saddle--he had previously been sitting sideways--and twisted his
moustache skywards. Jo wished to canter on, but he sternly forbade her,
flipping her horse on the nose and driving it back when she tried to
pass; for it would have damned his manly dignity for ever had a woman
preceded him.

Our first view of Ipek was of a forest of minarets shooting up from the
orchards, not a house was to be seen. Ramases tried to make us lodge in
a vague looking building. We asked him if that were the best hotel. He
answered nonchalantly, "Nesnam" (don't know); so we hunted for
ourselves, discovering in the main square a blue house labelled "Hotel
Skodar" in large letters.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XI

IPEK, DECHANI AND A HAREM



We entered the courtyard of the inn. Tiny as it was all Ipek seemed to
be plucking poultry in it. An urbane old woman came forward, evidently
the owner. She had short arms, and her hair grey at the roots was
stained with henna, which matched her eyes. A dog fancier once told us
never to buy a dog with light-coloured eyes if we wanted a trustful
loving nature, so we wondered if it applied to humans.

She showed us a tiny dungeon-like room entirely filled up by two beds.
We were not impressed; but she assured us that we should have a large
beautiful room the next day for the same price. So we engaged it and
strolled out into the evening.

Buffaloes were sitting in couples round the big square. They chewed the
cud with an air of incomparable wisdom so remote from the look of
reproachful misery that is generally worn by an ox. Goats came in from
the hills with their hair clipped in layers, which gave them the
appearance of ladies in five-decker skirts; and children were playing a
queer game. They jumped loosely round in circles with bent knees, making
a whooping-cough noise followed by a splutter. We saw it often
afterwards, and decided that it must be the equivalent to our "Ring o'
Roses."

Work was over for the day, the sun set behind the hills which ringed us
round, and we went to kill time in a café.

While we were exchanging coffees with an "American," who was showing us
the excellences of his wooden leg which he had made himself, a
breathless man ran in.

He had been searching the town for us. The governor had ordered him to
put us up, as his had the notoriety of being a clean house. Having taken
a room already with the amiable old lady we feared to disappoint her, so
we decided not to move. The man piteously hoped that we were not
offended; and we explained at length.

When we reached the hotel again our old hostess bustled up, more sugary
than ever.

"We have just thought of a little rearrangement," she said.

"How so?"

"Well, do you understand, the inn is very full to-night, so we thought
it best that you should both take the one bed and I and my daughter
will take the other."

"Oh," said we, "in that case we had better move altogether, we have
anoth--"

"Indeed, no no," said the old lady, horrified. "Stay, stay. There sit
down. It is good, keep your beds." She patted us and left us.

We had an uninspired dinner. Greasy soup, tough boiled meat which had
produced the soup, minced boiled meat in pepper pods, and two pears
which turned out to be bad. The company, composed of officers and
nondescripts, pleased us no better than the dinner, so we decided to eat
elsewhere on the morrow.

The governor's secretary came in to arrange for an interview with his
chief--yet another Petrovitch and brother to the governor of Scutari. By
this time we had each imbibed a dozen Turkish coffees during the day,
but we slept for all that from nine until nine in the morning.

Marko Petrovitch, whom we saw early, was the best and last Petrovitch we
met in Montenegro. Like all the Petrovitches he wore national costume.
He was handsome, shy, and kindly, said we must go to Dechani the most
famous of Balkan monasteries, and promised us a cart for the journey.

After leaving the governor we plunged into melodrama.

Hearing a noise we discovered crowds of weeping women and children round
the steps of a shop. A young man in French fireman's uniform seemed to
be very active, and an old trousered woman passively rolled down the
steps after receiving a box on the ears.

We thought it was a policeman arresting an elderly thief; but Jo, seeing
blood on the lady's face, told him he was a "bad man." He lurched,
staring at her stupidly. His companions, more firemen, came forward
grinning sheepishly, and we recommended them to lead him away out of
mischief. But the next minute a balloon-trousered child rushed up to us
and tugged at Jan's coat.

"Quick, the devil man is doing more bad things."

We ran down the road beyond the village and saw him in the distance
dancing on an old Turk's bare feet with hobnailed boots, alternating
this amusement with cuffs on the face. We sprinted along, and seeing a
convenient little river wriggling along by the roadside, Jan caught him
by the neck and the seat of his trousers, swung him round, and pitched
him in. The man sat for a moment, bewildered, in the water, and then
climbed out uttering dreadful oaths; but as he came up Jan knocked him
into the water again.

Men in firemen's uniforms appeared from all sides, shouting--

"What are you doing? You mustn't. Who are you?"

"We know the governor," said Jo. The men were making gestures of
deference when the reprobate rushed from the river, aiming a whirling
blow at Jan which missed.

The men hurled themselves on him, but he grabbed Jan's coat to which he
clung, howling in unexpected English--

"Shake 'ands wi' y' ennemi." Suddenly everybody spoke English, and we
wondered into what sort of a fairy tale had we fallen.

It was lunch time so we did not stay for explanations, but hurried back
to the town with the weeping old Turk, gave him our small change, which
seemed to cure the pains in his feet, and hunted for the other hotel.

It was tucked away in a romantic back street. The bar room was tiny, but
it was very pleasant to sit round little tables under shady trees in the
courtyard.

"What have you for lunch?" we asked a solid-looking waiter boy.

"Nema Ruchak, bogami." We have no lunch. We looked at all the other
people absorbing meat and soup.

"Give us what you have."

"We have nothing, bogami."

"Have you soup?"

"Yes, bogami."

"And cheese?"

"Ima, ima, bogami."

"That will do for us."

He thereupon brought macaroni soup, boiled meat, roast meat, fried
potatoes, cheese, grapes, and coffee.

We never found out why in Montenegro they should make it a point of
honour to say they have nothing. It resembles the Chinese habit of
alluding to a "loathsome" wife and a "disgusting" daughter.

After lunch we visited our own hotel and found mine hostess waiting for
us with her short arms akimbo. She wanted the "beautiful large bedroom"
to which we had moved in the morning, finding it the same size as the
one below, but rather lighter. Its former occupant had arrived, and we
were to go back to the dungeon.

"That is not good," said Jo, and we flatly refused to go downstairs.

"If we leave this room we go altogether."

She again patted us and begged us to consider the matter closed. We
could stick to the room.

Certainly that dog fancier was right.

There was a very old monastery which we had passed as we rode into
Ipek.

Although we are more interested in the people of the present than in
ruins of the past, these old Serbian monuments leave so strange a memory
of a civilization suddenly cut off at its zenith that they have an
emotional appeal far apart from that of archæology. These little oases
of culture preserved amongst a wilderness of Turk tempt the traveller
with a romance which is now vanishing from Roman and Greek ruins.

The Ipek monastery is a beautiful old place with the walls half buried
on one side. The old church, orange outside, is very dark within, but
contains many beautiful paintings. Surely here is the home of Post
Impressionism and of Futurism. The decorations of the bases of the
pillars are quite futuristic even orpeistic.

The pictures are Byzantine. But the Turks have picked out the eyes, as
they always do. One enormous painting of a head which filled a
semicircle over a door is particularly fine. Most halos are round, but
the painter had deemed the ears and beard worthy of extra bulges in this
saint's halo, which added to the decorative effect.

Beautiful apple trees were dotted about the big garden through which the
wriggly river ran. Ducks, geese and turkeys wandered around, so fat that
they were indifferent to the meal that was being served out to them. A
boy woke up the mother of a family of young turkeys and pushed her
towards the dinner with his foot. She hurried there involuntarily and
sat down for a nap with her back to the plate, the picture of outraged
dignity.

We got into conversation with a priest, who insisted we should call upon
the archbishop. The Metropolitan was a cheery soul, wearing a
Montenegrin pork-pie hat very much on one side, and black riding
breeches which showed as his long robes fluttered during his many
gesticulations.

While with him we lost the impression that we were living in the unreal
times of the Rose and the Ring. He was intensely civilized, spoke French
excellently, and had many a good story of his life in Constantinople and
other places. For the English he had great affection. The last
Englishman in Ipek, a king's messenger, had flown to the monastery to
escape from the Hotel Europe and its bugs. The next morning he would not
get up. The archbishop went to his room to remonstrate.

"No, no," said he; "I spent two nights under a ceiling which rained bugs
upon me, and I know a good bed when I've got it."

Coffee and cigarettes came in, of the best, and the rakia was a thing
apart from the acrid stuff we were accustomed to.

He admitted its superiority. The plums came from his own estate, and
were distilled by the monks. The great difficulty was to prevent him
from giving us too much.

We talked of the war, and he related many atrocities, winding up with
"Of course, England must win; but what will become of us in the
meanwhile?"

That evening we had a visitor. A very large Montenegrin in French
fireman's uniform knocked at the door. He said his name was Nikola
Pavlovitch. He had been sent by the governor to apologise for the
"trouble" Jan had had that morning with the drunken soldier.

"'E in jail now, 'e verry sorry and say if you forgive 'im, mister, 'e
never touch rakia, never no more. 'E good chap reely. Got too much rakia
this mornin', 'E think about Turks an' get kinder mad some'ow. 'E don't
know what 'e done; first thing 'e knows 'e finds 'imself in river."

Nikola Pavlovitch was, though not an officer, the commandant of a
contingent of miners from America. The governor had told him also to
offer himself as cicerone for the morrow, the cart having been ordered
for our trip to Dechani.

We didn't like cicerones and demurred.

"I kin talk for you," he said. But we owned to speaking Serb.

"I know all de country, kin tell you things: bin 'ere twenty years
ago."

We saw he wanted to come, and noticed that he had a very likable face,
strong features, straight kindly eyes. We realized that he would be a
very pleasant companion and arranged to meet at the stable the next day.

And so, at last, we drove in one of the queer little Serb carts we had
avoided so anxiously. A few planks nailed together and bound around with
an insecure rail, four wheels slipped on to the axles with no pins to
hold them, a Turkish driver dangling his legs--such was our chariot.
Some hay was produced to improvise a seat; we bought some apples on
tick, as the vendor said he had no change for our one shilling note, and
off we drove.

Nikola Pavlovitch started yarning almost at once, and we never had a
dull moment. He was a comitaj once, in the old days when Turkey owned
Macedonia and the Sanjak. He said that nearly all comitaj were men of
education and intelligence. When Turkish rule became oppressive, when
too many Christian girls were stolen and vanished for ever into harems,
the comitaj appeared, farms were raided, minute but fierce battles were
fought; but in spite of this continual supervision, occasional and
mysterious murders were needed to keep down the excesses of the Turk.

Pavlovitch waved a hand towards the sullen mountains of Albania, which
were on our right.

"Dose Swabs don' tink o' nuttin' but killin'. Jess ornary slaughter,
Mister Jim. Now dat Jakovitza [a town to the south] dat don't mean
nuttin but 'blood' in their talk, 'lots o' blood' dat's what it means.
Sure. Dese peoples don' respect nuttin but killin'; an' when you've done
in 'bout fifty other fellers you'r reckoned a almighty tough. If you
wanted to voyage dere, f'r instance, you'd 'ave ter get a promise o'
peace, a 'Besa' they calls it, from one of dese tough fellers, and he
makes 'imself responsible to end any feller wat disturbs you; 'e can
post a babby along o' you and so long as the kiddie's wid yer nobody'll
touch you. Dats so, Mister Jim, you bleeve me. But all de same, dey've
fixed it up so's dis killing business ain't perlite wen deres women
about, so every feller taks 'is wife along 'o 'im so's not to be ended
right away."

Every house by the roadside was a fortress, loopholes only in the ground
floor, windows peering from beneath the eaves and turrets with gunslits
at the second story; here and there were old Turkish blockhouses, solid
and square, showing how the conquerors had feared the conquered.

"One o' dese tough fellers 'e kill more'n hundred fellers. Great chief
'e is. Wen 'e was sixteen 'is fader get condemned ter prison way in
Mitrovitza. Dis young tough 'e walk inter court nex' day, in 'e kill de
judge and two of de officers and 'scape inter de mountains."

Nick himself when he was a comitaj had twice been caught by the Turks.
Once he was shot in thirteen places at once, but was found by some
Christian women and eventually recovered; the second time the Turks beat
him almost to death with fencing staves, and though they thought him
dying put him on an ox cart and sent him to the interior of Turkey.

"I was ravin' mad dat journey," he said. "I don' want ter go ter 'ell if
it's like dat."

They put him in hospital and treated him kindly; but once better they
threw him into a Turkish gaol. He described how the prison was dark as
night, because the poorer prisoners blocked up the windows, stretching
their arms through for doles from the passers-by.

"We was all eaten wi' lice," he went on, "an' if de folks 'adn't sent me
money an' food I'd a starved to def, sure. 'N den dey bribes de governor
'n a soldier, 'n dey lets me 'scape."

He lay a cripple in Montenegro six months, but in the summer crawled
down to the Bocche de Cattaro and on the sweltering shores of the
Adriatic built himself a primitive sweat bath. In a few weeks he was
better, and in a few months cured. He then went to the mines in America,
for he dared not return to Macedonia. He saved £800 and returned with
it to his sister's in Serbia, but was so oppressed by the misery about
him that he gave away all his money and went back.

"Dere's lots a mineral in dese mountains, you feller. I show you one
lump feller got a' Ipek, an' I guess it's silver, sure. Wen de war over
you come back an' we'll go over dem places tergedder. Dere's coal too.
Lots."

He told us that the wretched skeleton who was driving us had power in
Turkish days to commandeer the services of Christian labourers, and to
pay them nothing.

We passed by placid fields containing cows, horses, donkeys. The country
seemed untouched by war. Those cows could never have drawn heavy carts
and lain exhausted and foodless after a heavy day's work. The horses
reminded one of the sleek mares owned by old ladies who lived in awe of
their coachmen.

For this all belonged to Dechani, and it was beyond the power of the
state to touch their riches; nor had they been molested even in the days
of Turkish rule.

"You see, monastery 'e pay money to the toughest Albanians--Albanian
they give besa--and nobody never do no 'arm to the monasteries. Russia
she send much money, she send always her priest to Dechani and the
Turks they keep sorter respectful."

Our first sight of Dechani disappointed us a little, the proportions
lacked the beauty of the Ipek church; but the big old door marked by the
fire the Turks had built against it, decades before, cheered us up a
bit.

A pleasant priest with a smooth face and ringlets two feet long greeted
us and led us to the little Russian hospital which was fitted into the
Abbey, warning us not to bang our heads against the heavy oak beams in
the corridors.

The Russians welcomed us heartily, preparing the most wonderful tea,
Australian butter, white bread made with flour brought from Russia.

Pavlovitch enjoyed himself immensely. Food was thin in the barracks. But
he was very worried about the priest's long ringlets.

"I'd soon cure 'im, a month diggin' de trench!" he murmured.

After tea we examined the church. The interior was one miraculous blue:
pictures with blue backgrounds, apostles with blue draperies, blue
skies, a wonderful lapis lazuli.

Once the Moslems had overpowered the defenders of the church and had got
in, the eyes of some of the saints were picked through the plaster.
Legend runs, however, that while they were desecrating the tomb of Tzar
Stephan who founded the church, the tomb of the queen, which lay
alongside, exploded with a violent report and terror struck the Turks,
who fled.

They showed us the queen's tomb, split from top to bottom. The priests
naturally claim a miracle; but Pavlovitch said, "I tink dey verry
clever, dey done dat wi' gunpowder."

The Tzar Stephan had wished to build the church of gold and precious
stones, but a soothsayer said--

"No, my lord, build it of plain stone, for your empire will be robbed
from you, and if it be of gold greedy men will tear it to pieces, but if
it be of plain stone it will remain a monument for ever."

So he built it of fine marble. The central pillars were forty feet high,
and each cut from a single piece, with grotesque carved capitals. The
great screen was wonderfully carved and gilded. Wherever one looked was
decoration, almost in excess.

Ringlets invited us to tea with the Russian bishop who was in charge. He
was a stout, sweet-mannered little man, who shook his head woefully over
the war.

Somehow Pavlovitch discovered that he and the bishop were the same age,
forty-eight. We contrasted Pavlovitch's spare athletic frame with the
well-fed shape of the bishop, and felt instinctively which was the
better Christian. Coffee and slatka were brought in. This slatka is
always handed to callers in well-regulated Serbian households. It is jam
accompanied by many little spoons and glasses of water. Each guest dips
out a spoonful, licks the spoon, drinks the water, and places his spoon
in the glass. There is also a curious custom with regard to the coffee.
If a guest outstays his welcome, a second cup is brought in and
ceremoniously placed before him--but, of course, this hint depends upon
how it is done.

"It is Friday," remarked Pavlovitch, regretfully. "Odder days we gits
mighty good meal." He was very anxious for us to stay the night so that
we should fit in a first-class breakfast, but the morrow was the Ipek
fair, and we could not miss that.

Night was coming so we hurried off and drove away. The horses went quite
fast, as we had made them a present of some barley. We had discovered
that since the beginning of the war, when they had been requisitioned by
the Montenegrin Government, they had lived on nothing but hay, and the
owner, who was driving them, said that they would soon die, and that
when they did he would not receive a penny and would be a ruined man. He
added pathetically--

"One does not like to see one's beasts die like that, for after all one
is fond of them."

We arrived after dark, and ordered supper for three. The inn lady was
scandalized.

"But that is a common soldier," she said. "There are many fine folk in
the dining-room, arrived to-day. The General--"

So we dined upon the landing.

The next day we got up very early, went down to the dining-room and
found it was full of sleeping forms; we had coffee in our room.

We wandered round the market. It was still too early, people were
arriving and spreading their wares, men were hanging bright carpets on
the white walls. Beggars were everywhere, exhibiting their gains in
front of them. If one could understand they seemed to cry like this--

"Ere y'are, the old firm; put your generous money on the real thing. I
'as more misery to the square inch than any other 'as to the square
yard."

We found bargaining impossible, as they only spoke Albanian, and we
could only get as far as "Sar," how much.

Pavlovitch turned up later and was very helpful. We hurried him to a
silver shop which was displaying a round silver boss. He beat them down
from sixteen to ten dinars, after which we plunged into a side street
filled with women squatted cross-legged behind a collection of
everything that an industrious woman who owns sheep can confection.

"I have nothing for thee," said an old woman to Jo, who peered into her
basket--Pavlovitch translating.

Jo withdrew a tiny pair of stockings--a marvel of knitting in many
coloured patterns.

"What about these?" she said.

"Hast thou children?"

"No; but how much?" said Jo.

The price was four piastres. Jo gave four groschen and the old woman
peered anxiously at the money in her palm.

"It is too much," she said.

Pavlovitch explained that somehow four groschen worked out to more than
four piastres; but we left her to calculate what fractions of a centime
she had gained.

Our old innkeeper looked very truculent when we entered.

"Are you going to lunch here?"

"No; we left word."

"Then you can't stay here."

[Illustration: IN THE BAZAAR OF IPEK.]

[Illustration: STREET COFFEE SELLER IN IPEK.]

We pointed out that her meals were bad and very dear. She retaliated by
making a fearful noise, and invited us to go and sleep at the Europe;
but we remembered the Archbishop's story and stood firm.

"If you don't leave us in peace we will appeal to the Governor."

"Do, do. Go to the Governor," said the old lady, her little girl, a
wry-mouthed charwoman and a little boy whom Jo had noticed stealing our
cigarettes. The dog joined in and barked vociferously.

We went to the Governor who was near by. "They don't understand
innkeeping here, and she is a drunken old slut," he said, and sent for
her husband.

We went defiantly again to the Europe for lunch.

Jo had been expressing her wish to Pavlovitch to visit a harem. He came
to tell us that it had been arranged, as the chief of the police was a
friend of his, and he had asked a rich Moslem to let her visit his
wives. The Moslem had graciously assented, saying that he would do it as
a great favour to the chief of the police, and that no "European" woman
had ever visited an Ipek harem.

We went down the broad street with its brilliant houses, admiring the
gaudy colours of the women's trousers. "What a pity," we said, "that
such a word as _loud_ was invented in the English language."

Outside a huge doorway were sitting the chief of police and the wealthy
Albanian. We were introduced with great ceremony, and the Moslem, losing
no time, took Jo through the doorway into a courtyard. At the end was
another door guarded by a responsible-looking Albanian. He stood aside,
and she entered another court full of trees and a basket-work hut. She
passed through the lower story, which was full of grain, and ascended
into a beautiful room with a seat built all round it.

It was entirely furnished with carpets. He waved his hand to the seat,
called to his wives much as a sportsman summons his dogs, and left.

They came in, three women, simply dressed in chemise and flowered cotton
bloomers. Their voices were shaking with excitement, and they were
fearfully upset because Jo got up to shake hands with them.

They only spoke Albanian, and a few words of Serb. One had been very
beautiful, but her teeth were decayed, another was a healthy-looking
young woman, and the third was frankly hideous.

They brought coffee, the chief wife presenting it with her hand across
her chest--a polite way of saying--

"I am your slave."

Jo spoke Serb, and they clearly said in Albanian--

"If only we could tell what you are saying."

After which every one sat and beamed, and they kept calling for
somebody.

A plump dark-eyed girl came in, the first wife's daughter. She spoke
Serb, and interpreted for the wives.

They wanted to know everything, but knew so little that they could grasp
nothing.

Where had Jo come from? She tried London, Paris; no use, they had never
heard of them--two weeks on the sea--they didn't know what the sea was,
nor ships nor boats. They had never left Ipek and only knew the little
curly river.

The girl said that "devoikas" did not learn to read and write. That was
for the men.

Jo finally explained that she had ridden on horseback from Plevlie. Then
they gasped--

"How far you have travelled! What a wonderful life, and does your
husband let you speak to other men?"

She asked them what they did.

"Nothing." "Sewing?" "A little," they owned with elegant ease.

The chief wife had recently lost one of her children, but did not seem
to know of what it had died.

"I should think a woman doctor would be useful here," said Jo.

They screamed with laughter. "How funny! Why, she would be _so_ thick!"
they said, stretching their arms as wide as they could.

They kept inventing pretexts for keeping her, but when she rose to go
for the third time they regretfully bade her farewell, the daughter took
both her hands and imprinted a smacking kiss.

Outside the healthy-looking wife emerged from the basket hut, where she
was evidently preparing some delicacy to bring up, and showed signs of
deep disappointment.

The responsible-looking man who let her out also expressed his regrets
that she had not stayed longer. In the great street doorway was seated
the husband, but no Jan, no Pavlovitch, so Jo sat with him, somewhat
embarrassed, eating bits of apple which he peeled for her.

In the afternoon we went to bid farewell to the Archbishop and took
Pavlovitch with us. The Archbishop gave Pavlovitch a poor welcome until
he heard his name.

"Are _you_ Nikola Pavlovitch, of whom I have heard so much from the
Governor? I thought you were only a common soldier. I have met you at
last."

We felt we were really consorting with the great.

Jo related her harem experiences, and he told of the attempts of the
young Turks in Constantinople to abolish the veil, of how he had
assisted at small dinner parties where the ladies had discarded their
veils, and of the ferocity with which the priests and leaders had fought
and quashed the movement.

One lady had ventured unveiled into the bazaar, and one of the lowest of
women had given her a blow on the face. On appealing to a policeman she
had received small comfort, as he told her she ought to be ashamed of
herself.

As we went home we met women coming home from the fair with unsold
carpets. They accosted us and wanted to know why we were writing them in
the morning so that they could tell their relatives all about it.

When we reached our bedroom the old innkeeper came in. In dulcet tones
she admired our purchases. We were rather stiff.

Suddenly she fell upon Jo's neck saying, "You mustn't be angry with me,"
and remained there explaining.

When she left, Jo looked gravely at Jan, took a toothcomb, let down her
hair, and worked hard for a while.

Next day we went for a long walk. As we were returning a terrific storm
burst over us. We had left our mackintoshes in the inn, and were soon
wet through. We got back just at supper time, and after, as Jan had no
change of clothing, he decided to go to bed in his wet things, heaping
blankets and rugs over himself in the hopes of being dry by the morrow.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII

THE HIGHWAY OF MONTENEGRO--II


Jan awoke nearly dry, or in a sort of warm dampness, at 4.30 a.m. Not a
soul was about, and we packed by candle. There was a purple dawn, and
the towering cliffs behind the minarets glowed a deep cerise for at
least ten minutes ere the light reached the town. The streets were still
and deserted, but at last an old man with a coffee machine on his back,
and a tin waistbelt full of pigeon-holes containing cups, took a seat at
a corner. At six he was surrounded by groups of Albanian workmen
drinking coffee, and he beckoned us to come and take coffee with him,
but we were suspicious of the cleanliness of his crockery. A
miserable-looking woman in widow's weeds was loitering about the door of
the post office, and with her was a tattered girl surrounded by trunks,
suit-cases, and bandboxes, so we guessed they were there to be fellow
passengers. A waggon loaded with boxes halted before them, but the widow
declined to let _her_ baggage go by it.

At last the post waggon came. It was a small springless openwork cart
with a rounded hood on it, so that it could roll when it upset--which
was the rule rather than the exception--luggage accommodation was
provided only for the "soap and tooth-brush" type of traveller; but the
widow insisted upon packing in all her movables, and after that we four
squeezed into what room was left. The seat was low, one's chin and knees
were in dangerous proximity, and a less ideal position for travelling
some thirty-five miles could not be imagined. The widow's portmanteau,
all knobs and locks, was arranged to coincide with Jo's spine. The
tattered maid was loaded with five packages on her knees which she could
not control, so we looked as cheerful as we could and said to ourselves,
"Anyway it will do in the book."

At the start Jan was rather grateful for the squash, for the air was
chilly; soon the damp, exposed parts of his clothing cooled to freezing
point, and it was lucky that they were not more extensive.

As we rolled over the craters and crests of the--what had once
been--stone-paved streets, the driver halted, here to buy a large loaf
of bread, there to purchase smelly cheese, and finally to pick up a
gold-laced officer, whom we took to be the post-guard. The driver, who
sat back to back with Jan, grumbled at him because he took up too much
room. But Jan replied that it was his own fault for not making the
carriage bigger, and that his knees were not telescopic. We received the
post of Montenegro, for this was the only road out; it consisted of
three letters and a circular, so we judged that Montenegrin censorship
was pretty strict.

The road was flat, the surrounding country covered with little scrubby
oak bushes, in and out of which ran innumerable black pigs who had long
cross pieces bound to their necks to prevent them from pushing through
hedges into the few maize fields. As the miles passed Jan slowly began
to dry, his temperature went up and his temper became better. The widow,
we discovered, was the relict of a Greek doctor who had died of typhus
in Plevlie, and she was returning to her native land.

Presently we came to a small inn, a hut like all others, and the driver
commanded us to get out. By this time we were accustomed to the sight of
nobles kissing market women relatives, and it did not surprise us to see
the officer embrace the rather dirty hostess of the inn and kiss all the
children; but when he took his place behind the bar and began to serve
the coffee!... It was a minute before we realized that he had not been
guarding the three letters and the circular, but merely was returning
home.

At the Montenegrin frontier, which was some hours on, a soldier asked us
for a lift, as though he could not see that we were already bulging at
all points with excess luggage; at the Serbian frontier Jan was asked
for his passport, and as they did not demand that of the widow, we
concluded that they imagined her to be Mrs. Gordon, and Jo and the
tattered one, two handmaids.

Immediately over the frontier the road began to be Serbian, but not as
Serbian as it became later on, and we reached Rudnik--and lunch--in good
condition. Another carriage similar to our own was here, containing a
Turkish family. The father, a great stalwart Albanian, and the son a
budding priest in cerise socks. The priest was carrying food to his
carriage, and we discovered that a woman was within, stowed away at the
back like the widow's luggage, and carefully protected by two curtains,
so that no eye should behold her. Her sufferings between Rudnik and
Mitrovitza can be imagined when you have heard ours.

From Rudnik we walked to ease our cramped limbs, and the road became so
bad that the driver went across country to avoid it. Here is the receipt
for making a Serbian road.

"The engineer in charge shall send two hundred bullock trains from Here
to There. He shall then find out along which path the greater number
have travelled (_i.e._ which has the deepest ruts), after which an
Austrian surveyor shall map it and mark it, 'Road to There.' Should the
ruts become so deep that the carts are sliding upon their bottoms rather
than travelling upon their wheels, an overseer must be sent to throw
stones at it. He and ten devils worse than himself shall heave rocks
till they think they have hurt it enough, when they may return home,
leaving the road ten times worse than before, for the boulders by no
means are to fill the ruts, but only to render them more exciting."

Oh, we walked. Indeed, we walked a good deal more than the driver
thought complimentary, we got out at every uphill, and put steam on so
that we should not be caught on the downhills. By supreme efforts we
managed to get in four hours' walking out of the torturous thirteen.
Once--when we were a long way ahead--we were stopped by a gendarme.

"Where are your passports?" demanded he.

"In the post-waggon," replied Jan.

"Why did you leave your passports in the post-waggon?"

"Because they were in the pocket of my great-coat."

"Why did you leave your great-coat in the post-waggon?"

"Because it is hot."

"I shall have to arrest you," quoth the gendarme.

But his officer came from an adjoining building and told him not to make
a fool of himself, and on we went, taking short cuts, following the
telegraph poles, which staggered across country like a file of
drunkards.

Eventually the carriage caught us up and the driver insisted that we
should get in. He added that he could not lose all day while we walked,
and that he would never get to Mitrovitza; it seemed superfluous to
point out that we had gone quicker than he, but to avoid argument we
clambered in. The driver, in a temper, slashed his horses, and off we
went, over ruts and stones full speed ahead. It was like being in a
small boat in a smart cross-choppy sea, with little torpedoes exploding
beneath the keel at three minute intervals; and this road was marked on
the map as a first-class road; the mind staggers at what the second and
third-class must be like. These countries are still barbarous at heart,
but Europe cries out upon open atrocities, and so they have invented the
post-waggon. After all, pain is a thing one can add up, and the sum
total of misery produced by the post, travelling daily, must in time
exceed that of the Spanish Inquisition. Thus do they gratify their
brutal natures.

We bounded along. The brakes did not work, the carriage banged against
the horses' hocks, who, in turn, leapt forwards, and our four heads met
in a resounding thump in the centre of the waggon; after which Jo
insisted that the widow should turn her hatpins to the other side. The
widow's luggage cast loose and hit us in cunning places when we were not
looking. The cart rocked and heaved, and we expected it to turn over.
There were other waggons on the road--heavy, slow ox carts, exporting
wool or importing benzine or ammunition, with wheels of any shape bar
round--some were even octagonal; and as they filed along they gave forth
sounds reminiscent of Montenegrin song, a last wail from the hospitable
little country whose borders we were leaving behind us.

The driver promised us a better road further on; but the better road
never came, and we hung on waiting for something to break and give us
relief. There were hints, it is true, unfinished hints: some day men
will be able to travel in comfort from Mitrovitza to Ipek, but the day
is not yet. It is strange how the human frame gets used to things, and
we grew to believe that our driver not only liked, but joyed in each
extra bang and jolt--collected them as it were--for certainly he never
avoided anything, though occasionally he wound at the brake, but that
was only for show, because he knew that it did not work.

We reached Mitrovitza at dark with bones unbroken, and rattled down a
road with vague white Turkish houses upon one side, and a muddy looking
stream reflecting dull lights on the other. One last lurid lunge, we
leapt across a drain and broke a trace bar, but too late, we had
arrived.

The Hotel Bristol was full--why are there so many hotels in Serbia named
Bristol?--but we were received by a stupid-looking maid at the Kossovo,
and were given a paper to sign, saying who we were. Then down to the
restaurant, where we had a beefsteak which was a dream, and back to bed,
which was a nightmare, for all night long we bounced and banged and
bruised our journey over again, and awoke quite exhausted.

The first impression of a town which is entered by moonlight is usually
difficult to recover on the following morning, it is often like the
glimpse of a pretty girl caught, say, in a theatre lobby, and the charm
may never be rewoven. So it was with Mitrovitza, which in daylight
seemed just a dull, ordinary Turkish town. The Prefect was a bear, and
sent us on a long unnecessary walk to the station, a mile and a half.
Sitting on the road was the dirtiest beggar we had yet seen. As we came
towards her she chanted our praises, bowing before us and kissing the
dust; but she aroused only feelings of disgust and getting nothing, she
turned to curses till we were out of sight. The chief imports at the
station seemed to be cannons and maize; the only exports, millstones,
which looked like and seemed almost as palatable as Serbian bread. We
did our business without trouble, and coming back the beggar praised us
once more till we had passed, then hurled even louder curses after us.

We came to a tiny café in which were faint tinkling, musical sounds.

Jan: "I wonder what that is?"

Jo: "It sounds queer: shall we explore?"

Jan: "I dunno, perhaps they wouldn't like us."

Jo: "Come along. Let's see anyhow."

And up we went. In a large room was a deep window seat, and in the
window the queerest little Turkish dwarf imaginable. The little dwarf
was sitting cross-legged, and was playing a plectrum instrument. His
head was huge, his back was like a bow, and his plectrum arm bent into
an S curve, which curled round his instrument as though it had been bent
to fit. He was a born artist, and rapped out little airs and trills
which made the heart dance. There were three soldiers at tables, and
presently one sprang out on to the floor and began to posture and move
his feet, a woman joined him; the little man's music grew wild and more
rapid; another man sprang in, another woman joined, and soon all four
were stamping and jigging till the floor rocked beneath them. We gave
the little man a franc for his efforts, and his broad face nearly split
in his endeavour to express a voiceless gratitude.

We were no longer royalty, we were just dull, ordinary everyday folk,
and at the station had endless formalities to go through, examinations
of passes, etc., during which time all intending passengers were locked
in the waiting-room. But at last we were allowed to take seats in the
train, and off we went.

We passed through the plain of Kossovo where old Serbian culture was
prostrated before the onrush of the Turk, and whence Serbia has drawn
all its legends and heroes; possibly the most unromantic looking spot in
all Europe, save only Waterloo. Here, far to the left, was Mahmud's
tomb:--Mahmud the great victor, stabbed the day before the battle, and
dying as he saw his armies victorious. History contains no keener
romance. Serge the hero, accompanied by two faithful servants, galloped
to the Turkish camp, and commanded an interview with the Moslem
general, who thought he was coming to be a traitor. In face of the
Divan the hero flung himself from his horse, drew his sword, and stabbed
Mahmud where he sat, surrounded by his armies. Before the astounded
guards had recovered their surprise, Serge was again upon his great
charger and was out of the camp, cutting down any who barred his
passage. Mahmud did not die immediately, and his doctors slew a camel
and thrust him into the still quivering animal; when the dead beast was
cooling, they slew another, and thus the Moslem was kept alive till the
Serbian hosts had been overthrown. He and the Serbian Czar were buried
on the same field--one dead in victory, one in defeat.

We trundled slowly over the great plain whose decision altered the fate
of the world, for who knows what might have grown up under a great
Byzantine culture? The farms were solidly built houses with great
well-filled yards, surrounded by high and defensible walls. We came into
stations where long shambling youths, dressed in badly made European
clothes, lounged and ogled the girls in "this style, 14/6" dresses.
Signs of culture!

Why should the bowler hat, indiarubber collars, and bad teeth be
indissolubly bound to "Education Bills" and "Factory Acts"? Why should
the Serbian peasant be forced to give up his beautiful costume for
celluloid cuffs, lose his artistic instincts in exchange for a made-up
tie? It is the march of civilization, dear people, and must on no
account be hindered.

Coming back to Serbia from Montenegro was like slipping from a warm into
a cool bath. One is irresistibly reminded that the Lords of Serbia
withdrew to Montenegro, leaving the peasantry behind, for every peasant
in the black mountains is a noble and carries a noble's dignity; while
Karageorge was a pig farmer. There is a warmth in Montenegro--save only
Pod.--which is not so evident in its larger brother; a welcome, which is
not so easily found in Serbia. The Montenegrin peasant is like a great
child, looking at the varied world with thirteenth-century unspoiled
eyes; centuries of Turkish oppression has dulled the wit of the Serb,
and at the outbreak of the war Teutonic culture was completing the
process.

We passed beneath the shadow of Shar Dagh, the highest peak in the
peninsula, six thousand feet from the plain, springing straight up to a
point for all to admire, a mountain indeed.

We reached Uskub at dusk, found a hotel, and went out to dine. The
restaurant was empty, but through a half-open door one could hear the
sounds of music. The restaurant walls were--superfluously--decorated
with paintings of food which almost took away one's appetite; but one
enormous panel of a dressed sucking pig riding in a Lohengrin-like
chariot over a purple sea amused us.

In the beer hall a tinkly mandoline orchestra was playing, and a woman
without a voice sang a popular song--one thought of the women on the
Rieka River--a tired girl dressed in faded tights did a few easy
contortions between the tables, and in a bored manner collected her meed
of halfpence--we thought of the cheery idiot of Scutari. Was it worth
it, we asked each other, this tinsel culture to which we had returned?
And not bothering to answer the question went back to our hotel and to
bed.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIII

USKUB


Uskub is a Smell on one side of which is built a prim little French town
finished off with conventionally placed poplars in true Latin style; and
on the other side lies a disreputable, rambling Turkish village
culminating in a cone of rock upon which is the old fortress called the
Grad.

The country about Uskub is a great cemetery, and on every hand rise
little rounded hills bristling with gravestones like almonds in a
tipsy-cake. Strange old streets there are in Uskub. One comes suddenly
upon half-buried mosques with grass growing from their dilapidated
domes, a refuge only for chickens; some deserted baths, and in the midst
of all, its outer walls like a prison and with prison windows, the old
caravanserai.

We crept to its gateway and through a crack saw visions of a romantic
courtyard. The gate was locked, and we asked a little shoemaker--

"Who has the key?"

"It is now a leather tannery," he answered, and directed us to a
shoemaker in another street. This was full of shoemakers, and we chased
the key from shop to shop. It was like "Hunt the slipper." At last we
ran it to earth in the second waistcoat of a negligent individual in a
fez.

How happy the merchant of old must have felt when he entered the
courtyard after a long journey! The court was big and square, with a
fountain in the centre, the pillars were blue, and the arches red. Tiers
upon tiers of little rooms were built around; the expensive ones had
windows and the cheap ones none, and the door of each was marked by the
smoke of a thousand fires which had been lit within. Underneath were
cubby holes for the merchants' goods, and behind it all was a great dark
stable for the animals. Once shut up in the caravanserai one was safe
from robbers, revolutions, and the outside world. Lying in the doorway,
as if cast there by some gigantic ogre in a fit of temper, were two
immense marble vases, and two queer carved stone figures. Who made these
figures? Mystery--for Turkey does not carve. The old caravanserai no
longer gives protection to the harassed traveller, it only cures his
boots, for it has fallen from sanctuary to shoemakers, and the leather
workers of Uskub cure their hides therein. Hence, despite its beauty, we
did not loiter long, for we have ever held a bad smell more powerful
than a beautiful view.

Why don't towns look tragic when their bricks reek of tragedy? Why is
industrial misery the only form in which the cry of the oppressed is
allowed to take visible shape and to make the reputation of Realist
artists? In Uskub is concentrated the whole problem of the Balkans and
of Macedonia. Her brightly painted streets are filled with Serb, Bulgar,
and Turk, each disliking the rule of the other, the Bulgar hating the
Serb only worse than the Turk because the Serb is master. To the
inquiring mind it is problematic how much of this hate is national, and
how much political. Deprive these peasant populations of their jealous,
land-grabbing propagandist rulers, and what rancour would remain between
them? Intensive civilization, such as has been applied to these
states--civilization which has swept one class to the twentieth century,
while it leaves the others in its primitive simplicity--seems always to
produce the worst results. Nations can only crawl to knowledge and to
the possessions of riches, for politics to the simple are like "drinks"
to the savage and equally deadly in effect.

[Illustration: A WINE MARKET IN USKUB.]

Can the problem ever be resolved? Can Serbia with half her manhood wiped
out stand against her jealous neighbours? The creation of a lot of
small states on republican principles seems a far-fetched idea, and yet
it seems the best, especially if the menace of Turkey were removed, for
there is little doubt that Turkey, rearmed by the German, might make one
more effort to regain her lost territory under conditions vastly
different from those which ruled in the Balkan conflict. Macedonia,
Albania, and what is now Turkey in Europe, each made self-governing
under the shield of the Alliance--why not?--and Serbia as compensation
allowed to expand towards the north into territories which are wholly
Serb in nationality and in feeling.

We went through the pot market, whose orange earthenware was glowing in
the sun, and came upon an old house with such a wonderful ultramarine
courtyard that we went in to look. Over the door was written OLD
SERB CAFÉ JANSIE HAN. After sketching there we entered the inn for
coffee, and sat at tables made of thick blocks of marble smoothed only
at the top. The innkeeper said it was built in the days of the Czar
Duchan. If this were true, one would say that never had the interior
been whitewashed since then. But there was an air of cosiness about it,
and we visited it several times after. Near by was a little church with
a wonderful carved screen and a picture of Elijah going to heaven in a
chariot drawn by a pink horse, with the charioteer bumping along on a
separate cloud, which served as the box. We watched the sun set from one
of the tipsy-cake hills, sitting on a gravestone with an old Turkish
shepherd, who seemed to derive great comfort from our company.

The mountains around reflected the rosy lights of the sun in great flat
masses.

The muezzin sounded from the many minarets, and twilight was on us.
Uskub, romantic, dirty, unhealthy Uskub, was soon shrouded in mist; a
vision of unusual beauty.

One thought of the awful winter it had passed through, when dead and
dying had lain about the streets. Typhus, relapsing fever, and typhoid
had gripped the town. Lady Paget's staff, while grappling with the
trouble, had paid a heavy toll, as their hospital lay deep on the
unhealthy part of the city. For a time the citadel was in the hands of
an English unit. Before they were there it was a Serbian hospital, and
the staff threw all the dirty, stained dressings over the cliff, down
which they rolled to the road. The peasants used to collect these
pestiferous morsels and made them into padded quilts. Little wonder that
illness spread! In the summer Lady Paget's hospital withdrew to some
great barracks on the hill. The paths were made of Turkish tombstones,
which were always used in Uskub for road metal.

The hospital staff was saddened by the recent death of Mr. Chichester,
who had, like ourselves, just returned from a tour in the western
mountains, where he caught paratyphoid and only lived a few days.

One of the doctors had been in Albania, on an inoculating expedition. At
Durazzo he had been received by Essad Pacha, who was delighted to have
his piano played, and to watch the hammers working inside. Like Helen's
babies, "he wanted to see the wheels go wound." The piano and piles of
music must have been a memento of the Prince and Princess of Wied and of
their unhappy attempts at being Mpret and Mpretess--or is it Mpretitza,
or Mpretina? The music was still marked with her name, and was certainly
not a present to Essad.

The stamp of the English was on Uskub. Prices were high. One Turk
offered us a rubbishy silver thing for fifteen dinars; and Jan laughed,
saying that one could see the English had been there. Without blushing
the man pointed to a twin article, saying he would let that go for five
dinars.

What caused us to feel that we had wandered enough? Was it the awful
cinematograph show which led us through an hour and a half of melodrama
without our grasping the plot, or was it that the large copper tray we
bought filled us with a sense of responsibility?

At this wavering moment Lady Paget held a meeting of her staff. We
lunched there, and part of the truth leaked out after the meeting.

The Bulgars really were coming in against us, and in a day or two we
were to see things.

That decided the matter. We went to the prefect's office for our pass.
Firstly, we were ushered into a room occupied by a man in khaki, whose
accent betrayed that he hailed from the States. He was "something
sanitary," and belonged to the American commission, so we tried again.
This time the porter took us up to a landing, said a few words into a
doorway, and left us standing. As he was wandering in our vicinity, Jo
tried one of her two talismans: it is the word "PREPOSTEROUS"
ejaculated explosively, and is safely calculated to stagger a foreign
soul. The other is a well-known dodge. If a person bothers you, look at
his boots with a pained expression. He will soon take himself off--boots
and all.

The talisman worked, the pass was quickly managed, and we had but to
spend our time among the shops again. We resisted the seductions of an
old man with fifty knives in his belt, who reminded Jo of a horrible
nightmare of her infancy.

In her dream a grandfather with a basket had come peddling. Suddenly his
coat, blowing aside, revealed not a body, but a busy sewing-machine in
excellent working order. In her agitation, Jo fell out of bed.

We sat consuming beer outside a café decked with pink flowered bushes in
green boxes. One of the antique dames who cook sausages in the shadow of
the cafés brought us a plate each--funny little hard things--and we
bought cakes and nougat from perambulating Peter Piemen.

The station platform was like the last scene of a pantomime. Every one
we had met on our journeys rushed up and shook us by the hand.

First a Belgian doctor, from Dr. Lilias Hamilton's unit in Podgoritza.
He said Mrs. G. was also in the town, and that the others were all
coming shortly. Then we met a young staff officer from Uzhitze, who was
noted for his bravery. The train came in and we stumbled up to it in the
dark. There was a crowd of women about the steps in difficulty with
heavy bags. Jan ran forward to help one. She turned round. It was a
sister from Dechani. The rest turned round. It was the whole Russian
mission from Dechani.

We proceeded along the corridor, and ran into two men. We mutually began
to apologize.

"Hello," we said, "how did you get here?" They were two Americans we had
met in Salonika.

We got our seats and went out of the train by the other door. As we
passed the compartment we saw a familiar face. It was the little French
courier.

"Quel pays," he said, bounding up. "Et les Bulgars, quoi?"

"Good Lord," said Jan. "Let's go out and get some fresh air."

The only people lacking to complete the scene were the Sirdar and Dr.
Clemow.

A doctor who had just arrived from Salonika asked us to look after four
English orderlies who, new to the country, were travelling to the Red
Cross mission at Vrntze. With them were two trim, short-skirted, heavy
booted, Belgian nurses, who were going to a Serbian field hospital.

The train crawled. At times it was necessary to hold one's breath to see
if we were moving at all. It was always possible that the Bulgars had
blown up a bridge or so. One could imagine an anxious driver, his eyes
fixed on the line in front, looking for Bulgarian comitaj.

The travellers were restless. Our little French courier stood in the
corridor looking fiercely at the black night; his back view eloquently
expressive of his opinion of the Balkans.

Later on we all slept. A frightful braying sound awoke us.

No, not Bulgars--only the band. Same band, same station, same hour, same
awful incompetence.

So the princess had nothing to do with it!

Trainloads bristling with ragged soldiers passed us--open truck-loads of
them, carriage tops covered with sleeping men, some were clinging to the
steps and to the buffers.

Nish station had lost its sleepy air. Every one was energetically doing
everything all wrong. The four orderlies and the two Belgian sisters
were minus their passports. Some one had taken them away. These were run
to earth in the station-master's office, and as the party had no idea
where to go, we suggested they should come with us to the rest-house.

The first person we met there was Dr. Clemow.

"Have you got the Sirdar with you?" we asked.

He answered that he had brought Paul, the young Montenegrin interpreter,
with him. The English units in Montenegro had been recalled, and he had
come to Nish to try to rescind the order for his unit.

The town was at its gayest. The cloud had not yet dimmed the market.
Peasants poured in, knowing nothing of the Bulgars, little thinking that
they would be flying, starving, dying, in a few weeks' time. A Chinese
vendor of paper gauds had come into the town, and all the pretty girls
were wearing his absurdities pinned on to their head kerchiefs. One girl
was so fine and bejewelled that we photographed her, to the delight of
her lover, who stood aside to let us have a good view.

A man was selling honey in the comb accompanied by his bees, which must
have followed him for miles. They testified their displeasure at his
selling their honey by stinging him and most of the buyers.

No one seemed to know when the train was leaving. Station-master,
porters, all had a different tale. At last we decided to risk seven
o'clock in the evening, and the four orderlies and ourselves, copper
tray and all, bade farewell to the Belgian sisters, who had cut off
their hair, and wandered across to the station. The train arrived two
hours late and stood, ready to go out, guarded by tatterdemalions with
guns.

"You can't get in yet," said one of them barring our way.

"Why?"

"Ne snam."

The freebooting instinct arose in us; we awaited our opportunity, dodged
between two soldiers, and settled ourselves comfortably. Several
officials looked in and said nothing; another came and forbade us to
stay there, and passed on. An old woman came with a broom and cleaned
up. We sat on our feet to get them out of the way, somebody squirted
white disinfectant on the floor, and we were left in peace.

The train started at eleven, moved as far as a siding and stayed till
four. We found the four Red Cross men had only nine shillings between
them. Three had stood all the way from Salonika, as during an
unfortunate moment of interest in the view their seats had been
appropriated by a fat Serbian officer, his wife and daughter. The
fourth, a porter from Folkestone, had settled down on the floor, saying
"he wasn't going to concarn himself with no voos."

They had new uniforms, yellow mackintoshes, white kit bags, and
beautiful cooking apparatus, which took to pieces and served a thousand
purposes.

In the chilly morning we got out at Stalatch, just too late for the
Vrntze train. Luckily the station café was open.

The four Englishmen ordered beefsteak, but were given long lean
tasteless sausages. They asked for tea and were given black Turkish
coffee in tiny cups half full of grounds. We asked about the trains, and
were told we should catch the one next day. We argued, and extracted the
promise of a luggage train, which would soon pass.

Why is it that in Serbia they always, on principle, say, "You can't,"
after which under pressure they own, "Somehow you can"? In Montenegro
they say, "Certainly you can," after which they occasionally find that
"Somehow you can't."

At last the luggage train came. We sat on the step dangling our legs and
peering down at the country below us.

We were again held up at Krusevatz and bearded the officials. They
promised to put on a special carriage for us when the next luggage-train
should come in, some time that evening.

[Illustration: BIG GUN PASSING THROUGH KRUSEVATZ.]

Nothing for it but to lunch and to kill time. We watched the mountain
batteries pass on their way to the Bulgarian frontier. One or two big
cannon trailed by, drawn by oxen. Many horses looked wretched and
half-starved.

The Englishmen built a camp fire by the rail-road. Soon tea was brewing;
we drank, and chewed walnuts, stared at by crowds of patient Serbian
soldiers.

We travelled with the treasurer of the district, a charming man who
revelled in stories of a mischievous boyhood spent in a Jesuit
establishment. The fathers had stuck to him nobly until he had mixed red
paint with the holy water, and one of the fathers, while administering
the service, had suddenly beheld his whole congregation marked on the
forehead with damnatory crosses like criminals of old time. That ended
his school days. He introduced us to an officer, whose business it was
to search for spies, a restless man who was always feeling under the
seats with his feet. Perhaps it was only cramp! The four Englishmen,
cheered at the thought that their long journey was nearing its end,
burst into song. The Serbs stood round listening to the melodies that
were so different to their own plaintive wailings, and presently asked
us to translate. We don't know if the subtleties of "Didn't want to do
it," or "The little grey home in the west," were very clear in the
translations, as they seemed puzzled.

Arrived at Vrntze, we found no carriages to meet us. The station-master
at Krusevatz had promised to telephone, but as usual had not done it. We
had to break the news to our Englishmen, who, their songs over, had
naturally fallen into tired depression, and had to tell them that a
three-kilometre walk was before us, and one man had better stay to look
after the baggage. Carriages were telephoned for, but they would be long
in coming.

They were! We arrived at the village--no carriages. We agitated. The spy
searcher came out of the café--to which he and the "Bad Boy's Diary" man
had driven--and made people run about. They said the carriages had
already gone. We denied it, so they woke up the coachman.

We took the three men to the hospital and went back to sit in the café
with our new friends and met many old ones. The local chemist cheered
and promised us a present of mackintosh cotton to celebrate our return.
We had spent Easter morning in his shop eating purple eggs and drinking
tea enlivened with brandy, while the choir came in and chanted beautiful
Easter songs to us.

An hour rolled by, the café closed, our friends disappeared. We went to
meet the carriages from the station; at last they arrived, with Mr. Owen
half asleep amidst the kitbags.

It was far into the night when we arrived at our hospital burdened with
our two bags and the copper tray.

The night nurse, a kitten, and a round woolly puppy welcomed us.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIV

MAINLY RETROSPECTIVE


Hospital work again. How strange we felt. A sad-faced little Serbian
lady, widowed through typhus, was interpreting for the out-patients
while Jo was away; but she was alone in the world and did not want to
go--so Jo, homesick for her beloved out-patients, had to make the best
of it and do other work. The Serbian youth who had been put on the staff
as secretary, was dangerously ill with typhoid fever, which he had
picked up at Kragujevatz. The typhus barrack was a children's hospital,
containing little waifs chosen from the out-patients, and a few women.

In the early days when we had first arrived at Vrntze there were several
overfilled Serbian and one Greek hospital. They were only cafés and
large villas, unsanitary, stuffy, and overworked. The windows were never
open, and through the huge sheets of plate glass could be dimly seen in
the thick blue tobacco smoke a higgledy-piggledy crowd of beds. Often
two men lay in one bed covered with their dirty great coats, while
typhus patients and wounded men slept together. One man lay unconscious
for several days in the window, his feet in his dinner-plate. At last he
died, his feet still in the dinner. Mr. Berry took on a hydropathic
establishment which had been completed just before the first Balkan War.
This was used as the central hospital, where the staff lodged, and the
most serious surgical cases were nursed. In the basement an
operating-room was rigged up, there were bathrooms, disinfecting-rooms,
a laundry, and an engine-house, where gimcrack German machinery in fits
and starts provided us with electric light and hot water. The village
school on the hill opposite was annexed and cleaned by a sculptor, a
singer, a painter, and a judge of the Royal Horse Show. This was run as
a convalescent home, and was the cause of many a muddy sit down, as it
lay on the top of a greasy hill.

Other large buildings were gradually added, sulphured, and cleaned until
we had six hospitals, one of which was run for some time in connection
with the Red Cross unit.

Typhus had not stricken the village badly, but the old barracks were
full of cases which developed several days after each batch of wounded
came.

The Red Cross unit took on the typhus barracks. Mr. Berry, seeing that
surgery was for the moment a secondary thing, and having received a
batch of Austrian prisoners riddled with typhus, built some barracks not
far from the school. Glass was unobtainable, so thin muslin was used for
the windows.

The first precaution against bad air that Mr. Berry took in preparing
his chief surgical ward was to smash all top panes of the windows with a
broom, thus earning the name of the Window Breaker. Whenever the wind
blew through the draughty corridors and glass rattled down from the
sashes, word went round that "Mr. Berry has been at it again."

Our unit and the Red Cross ran a quarantine hospital together. It was
originally the state café and lay in the park of the watering-place.
Near by were the sulphur baths. We ripped out the stuffy little wooden
dressing-rooms, to the joy of the bath attendant, who possessed the
facsimile of Tolstoi's face, and with the _débris_ we built a large shed
outside for the reception of the wounded.

In the early days they came in large batches from other hospitals,
pathetic septic cases, their lives ruined for want of proper care. We
put their clothes in bags for future disinfecting, and the men, mildly
perplexed, were bathed, shaved, and sent to the "clearing-house," as it
was called. Those who developed typhus went to the barracks, and the
rest were drafted to the various hospitals in the village.

The clothes were first sulphurized to kill the lice, and then, until Dr.
Boyle's disinfector appeared, boiled. This was important, as typhus is
propagated by infected lice. Even forty-eight hours of sulphur did not
destroy the nits. One day the sulphur-room was opened after twenty-four
hours. Live lice were discovered congregated round the tops of the bags.
Jan put some in a bottle. They immediately fought each other, tooth and
nail, rolling and scrambling in a mass just like a rugby-football scrum,
and continued the fight for twelve hours at least, thus proving that the
scientific writer who says that the louse is a delicate creature and
only lives a few hours off the body can know little of the Serbian
breed.

The town, when we arrived, was a bouquet of assorted and nasty smells,
of which the authorities seemed proud. We cleaned up the streets by
running a little artificial river down the gutter. Mr. Berry had the
chief of the police sacked and instituted a sort of sanitary vigilance
committee. We took over the local but very primitive sewage works--a
field into which all the filth of the town was drained.

The slaughter-house was discovered. It was an old wooden shed built
over the lower end of the stream which washed the village from end to
end, draining successively the typhus barracks, the baths, and all the
hospitals. The shed itself was old and worm-eaten. The walls were caked
with the blood of years, yet the meat was always hung against them after
having been well soused in the filthy water. Mr. Berry decided to build
a new one: some of the money was subscribed through Mr. Blease by the
Liverpool Liberal Club; the rest Mr. Berry paid himself. At once the
state began to quarrel with the commune as to the ownership of the
proposed treasure. So the smells disappeared and the town engineer was
furious, saying he would "Put all right" when we left.

Luckily one of the chief men in the town had lived in America and knew
the value of cleanliness. Mr. Berry was offered an honorary Colonelcy;
but he refused, saying he would prefer to be made sanitary officer for
the town.

[Illustration: IN-PATIENTS.]

The spring came, bringing with it no fighting. A great offensive was
expected, had been ordered, in fact, but we heard later that the army
refused to advance. The work was very much lighter. Very few men were
entirely helpless. The hospitals, which were still emptying themselves
and whose men were coming to us, sent the survival of the fittest. Most
of the beds were carried out under the trees after the morning
dressings were done, and the men lay gossiping and smoking when they
could get tobacco. Outside visitors were rare. The Serbian ladies do not
go round the hospitals with cigarettes and sweets, and to find a Serbian
woman nursing is an anomaly.

Report says that many flung themselves into it with energy during the
first Balkan War, but that four years of it, ending with typhus, had
dulled their enthusiasm. It is not fair to blame them. To nurse from
morning till night in a putrid Serbian hospital with all windows closed
requires more than devotion and complete indifference to life. Three
Serbian ladies came to sew pillow cases and sheets every afternoon, and
one of them gave up still more time to teach the patients reading and
writing.

But the town was full, in the summer, of smartly dressed women, and the
village priest never once visited our hospitals. Hearing of the English
missions and their work, peasants began to come from the mountains
around, and the out-patient department became, under Dr. Helen Boyle, a
matter for strenuous mornings.

Many of these poor things had never seen a doctor in their lives. Serbia
even in peace-time had not produced many medical men, and those who
existed had no time to attend the poor gratis.

The percentage of consumptives was enormous. Every family shuts its
windows and doors for the winter and proceeds industriously to spit, and
so the disease spreads.

Diphtheria patients rode and walked often for ten hours and waited in
the courtyard, and people far gone with typhus staggered along in the
blazing spring sun.

One jolly old ragatops with typhus arrived in the afternoon with a
violent temperature, and Jo settled him comfortably in the courtyard
with his head on a sink until Mrs. Berry should come in to see about
taking him into the barracks. He seemed quite happy about himself, but
very worried about his blind beggar brother and his two half-blind
children, whose sight had been ruined by smallpox.

For the latter nothing could be done.

Another time she kept two boys waiting to see if Mrs. Berry could take
them into her typhus barracks. One had scarlet fever, and the other was
a young starving clerk in a galloping consumption, thirty-six hours from
his home.

Afraid to raise their hopes, and not knowing if there would be room for
them, Jo told them that they were to have some very strong medicine that
could only be administered two hours after a dose of hot milk and
biscuit (the medicine was only bovril). By this time Mrs. Berry arrived
and managed to squeeze the boys in.

However, we were told to clear the hospitals, for the wounded were
expected.

"What could be done with the scarlet fever boy?" At last an idea came:
"The Mortuary," built by the Horse Show Judge with such joy. The
mortuary that we had all gone to admire as a work of art.

But the scarlet fever boy did not seem to see it that way, for in the
night he escaped, and we have never seen him since.

Diphtheria was so prevalent that the Red Cross on receiving a patient,
gathered in the whole family for a few days, inoculated, washed, and
gargled it. They also toured the villages around, digging out typhus and
other infectious cases, thus stopping the spread of infection. They had
a most energetic matron, Miss Caldwell, who had already nursed in
Cettinje during the Balkan Wars, and we have already told how she
managed the Montenegrins.

Often the patients came in ox-carts. Too ill to be lifted out, they had
to be examined and treated in the carts. Dr. Boyle acquired a special
nimbleness in jumping in and out of these contrivances armed with
stethescope, spoons, bowls, and dressings. We accumulated a congregation
of "regulars," who came to be dressed every day--gathered feet,
suppurating glands, eczema, etc.

One old mother with a bad leg was bandaged up with boracic ointment and
told to come back in two days. She came. Jo undid the bandage. All the
old lady's fleas had swarmed to the boracic till it looked like a
fly-paper. After which we used Vermigeli.

All wore brightly woven belts, sometimes two or three, each a yard and a
half long, tightly wound round their bodies, thus making their waists
wider than their hips. One girl was black and blue with the pattern
showing on her skin, and many men were suffering from the evils of tight
lacing.

The village priest received belts as fees from the peasants when he
married them. He sent us a message to say he had some for sale, so we
went in a body to his house, were received by his daughter, who looked
like a cow-girl, turned over a basketful of belts, and bought largely.
After which he put up the price.

Jo went on night duty for the first time.

A queer experience this, starting the day's work at half-past seven in
the evening and finishing at seven in the morning--breakfasting when
other people are dining; hearing their contented laughter as they go off
to bed; and then a queer loneliness and the ugly ticking of a clock. One
creeps round the big ward. What a noisy thing breathing is. Some one
groans, "Sestra, I cannot sleep." This man has not been ordered morphia.
Silence once more broken only by the sound of the breathing, distant
howling of dogs from the darkness or the hoot of an owl. The old
frostbite man coughs; he coughs again insistently. Both say "Yes" to hot
milk. So down to the big kitchen, some mice scatter by, the puppy wakes
up and thinks it is time for a game. A woman's voice calls loudly,
"Sestra." Taking the milk off, Sestra hurries across the courtyard and
along the corridor to the little rooms with the puppy tugging at her
skirt. The woman wants water; she has wakened the other women--they want
water. When silence again comes back into the ward, one notes
instinctively the vivid colouring of the two big blue windows at the far
end, the long lines of beds disappearing into the darkness, the dim
light of the lantern on the table showing up the cheap clock and a few
flowers. The intensity of light upon this clock is only equalled by the
intensity of one's thoughts upon the clock. The minute-hand drags on as
though it were weary with the day's work. A groan ticks off the quarters
and cries for water or milk the half-hours. At last one o'clock. Time
for a midnight meal. Eggs and cocoa hurriedly eaten without appetite in
the kitchen, but breaking the monotony. Back to the ward again, one of
the patients very restless, in great pain. Poor fellow, he has had a
long and hard time of it, fifteen months in bed and all due to early
neglect.

"Sestra," he says, "sestra," and holds out a handkerchief heavy with
coin. "Tell the doctor to take me down to the operating-room and cure me
or not let me wake up."

Between four and five there is more movement in the ward. Groans give
way to yawns. In the windows the blue is paling to grey. Cocks are
crowing now quite close, now faintly, like an echo. Suddenly the world
is filled with work, "washings, brushings, combings, cleanings,
temperatures, breakfasts, medicines, some beds to make, reports, all
fitted together like a jigsaw puzzle, until at last the day-sisters come
and relieve, and yawning at the daylight one eats warmed-up dinner while
the others are having breakfast."

After a seven weeks' absence one was bound to miss many old friends in
the ward. Some had gone home, others were back in the army. Old Number
13, the king of the ward, was still there. He had a dark brown face and
white hair, and was furious if any dared to call him a gipsy.

"I am a respectable farmer," he said, "and I own seventeen pigs, a
horse, and five sheep, a wife, and two children."

He loved to tell of his wedding. It was done in the correct old Serbian
style. He went with his mother and a gun to the chosen one's house,
where she was waiting alone, her parents tactfully keeping out of the
way. They abducted the lady, who was treated with great honour as a
visitor in her future father-in-law's house.

"Father" turned up next morning. Rakia was served, and father divulged
ceremoniously how many pigs he could spare to them for keeping his
daughter.

Number 13 wanted to know everything: how old was Jo, how much she was
paid?

"What, you are not paid?" he said in amazement. "Then the English are
wonderful! In Serbia our women would not do that."

Poor little John Willie still left a blank, though he had died long
before. His name was not John Willie, but it sounded rather like it, so
we just turned it into John Willie. He loved the name, and told his
father about it.

They sat all afternoon hand-in-hand, saying at intervals, "Dgonn Oolie,"
and chuckling.

Jan once had brought back from a spring visit to Kragujevatz some
horrible sun hats.

They were the cast-off eccentricities of the fashions of six years ago,
and had drifted from the Rue de la Paix to this obscure Serbian shop
which was selling them as serious articles of clothing. Jo tried them
on, and one of the nurses became so weak with laughter that she tumbled
all the way downstairs.

Finding them quite impossible, Jo bequeathed them to the ward, where
they were snapped up enthusiastically.

The ugliest was an immense sailor hat, the crown nearly as wide as the
brim, but the head hole would have fitted a doll. However, John Willie
fancied that hat and was always to be seen, a tiny, round-backed figure,
wandering slowly in a long blue dressing-gown, blue woolly boots, and
the enormous hat perched on the top of his pathetically drooping head.

One day poor little John Willie became fearfully ill. His parents
arrived and sat dumbly gazing at him for two nights, while he panted his
poor little life away. His friend the Velika Dete (big child), once a
fierce comitaj, was moved away from the "Malo Dete," to make more room,
and he sulked, while the Austrian prisoner orderlies ran to and fro with
water for his head, milk, all the things that a poor little dying boy
might need; and old Number 13 passed to and fro shaking his head, for he
had been long in hospital and had seen many people die.

A man with knees bent (he said with scroogling them up all winter in the
cold) was put in John Willie's place. The Velika Dete came back, but he
would not speak to "Bent Knees" for weeks.

By this time the Austrian prisoners were very well trained and made
excellent orderlies in the ward. An ex-Carlton waiter was very dexterous
in sidling down the ward: on his five fingers a tray perched high,
containing dressing-bowls and pots bristling with forceps, scissors, and
various other instruments.

His chief talent lay in peppering frostbitten toes with iodoform
powder--a reminiscence of the sugar castor.

Our housemaid was a leather tanner, whom Jo's baby magpie mistook for
its parent, as he fed it at intervals every morning. A Czech in typhus
cloths spent his days down in the disinfecting, operating and bathrooms.
He had been an overseer in a factory and had added to his income by
writing love-stories for the papers. A butcher was installed in the
kitchens. Once a week he became an artist, killing a sheep according to
the best Prague ideals.

All our prisoners, about forty in number, clung to the English hospitals
as their only chance of life, for in other places sixty per cent. had
died of typhus.

The Serbs, though bearing no animosity, could do little for them. We saw
the quarters of some men working on the road. These were show quarters
and supposed to be clean. Each room had an outside door. On the floor
was room for six men and hay enough to stuff one pillow. They had no
rugs, and the Serbs could give them none. The cold in the winter must
have been intense.

We had come back to this little world after seven weeks' wandering, and
almost immediately Jan had gone off to Kragujevatz with a broken motor.

While he was away Jo got letters from England and Paris, which made her
realize that things were rather in a mess, and we should have to go
home. We had left England intending to stay in Serbia three months, and
had been then nearly nine.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XV

SOME PAGES FROM MR. GORDON'S DIARY


OCTOBER 2ND. Got a wire from Kragujevatz to say that the motor
hood is ready and that we must go over to get it fitted. We cleaned and
oiled the car, and at two ran it down the hill, but it would not start.
Found two sparking plugs cracked and the magneto very weak. When we had
fixed it up it was too late. Four a.m. to-morrow morning.

OCTOBER 3RD. Started in the dark, Mr. Berry, Sister Hammond,
Sava, I, and a female relation of some minister or other who wanted to
go to Kralievo. The motor working badly, as it is impossible to get the
proper spare parts. Three young owls were sitting in the middle of the
road scared by our headlights; we hit one, the other two flew away. Sava
and I stopped and tinkered at the old machine for about an hour, changed
all the sparking plugs again, after which she went better. We reached
Kralievo without incident, where we cast loose the female relation. From
Kralievo passed over the Morava, which was pretty floody and had
knocked the road about a bit. The road led right through the Shumadia
country, where the first revolts of the Serbian nation against their
Turkish oppressors were engendered. We passed the old Serbian
churchyard. I never passed by without going in. These queer old
tombstones all painted in days when pure decoration had a religious
appeal, these tattered red and white and black banners lend such a gay
air to death; these swords and pistols and medals carved into the stone
seem almost carrying a bombast to heaven. On one side of each tombstone
is the name of its owner, preceded by the legend, "Here lies the slave
of God." Do slaves love their masters?

When we passed this road in the winter, black funeral flags hung from
almost every hut, and even now the rags still flap in the breeze. A
Serbian boy, clad in dirty cottons, shouted to us, making
gesticulations. We slowed down and stopped.

"Bombe," he cried. "Aeropla-ane. Pet," he held up five fingers, "y jedan
je bili slomile. Vidite shrapnel."

He pointed. We saw a quiet, early autumn landscape, the blue sky
slightly flecked with thin horizontal streaks of cloud. Any scene less
warlike could not have been imagined.

"Vidite tamo," he cried once more.

Straining our eyes one could just see, between the lowest strata of
cloud, a series of small white round clouds floating.

"Shrapnel," said Sava, pointing.

"They hit one," said Mr. Berry.

I let in the clutch, we sped on once more. Bang! a tire burst.

Motor driving in Serbia is not a profession, it is an art. We were on
another of these first-class Serbian roads. Presently we came to a long
downhill.

"That is the place," said Mr. Berry to Sister Hammond, "where we spent
the night last winter when the motor stuck in the mud. There, beneath
that tree."

We shrugged our way down the hill, and presently came into the gipsy
environments of Kragujevatz.

A man stopped us, holding up a hand.

"Bombe," he said.

We got out. In the soft earth at the side of the road was a neat hole,
four inches in diameter. Peering down we could see the steel handle of
the unburst bomb. We next passed a smashed paling, in the garden behind
a crowd were searching for relics. An old woman had been killed, they
said. We turned into the main street and plunged into a large crowd. The
pavement had been torn up, and people were grubbing in the mud; pieces
of charred wood were passed from hand to hand.

"That's a bit of propeller," said one. "No; it's a bit of the frame,"
said another. A girl proudly held up a large piece of map scorched all
round the edges.

"And the men?" we asked.

"Nemachke (Germans)," answered the crowd; "both dead; one here, one over
there," pointing to the middle of the road.

We came into the Stobarts' camp, pitched up on the hill behind the
Kragujevatz pleasure ground.

"Did you see the aeroplanes?" they cried, running towards us.

"No," we answered; "but we saw the shrapnel."

"One was hit--it was wonderful. They were flying just over here, and a
shrapnel burst quite close; and then one saw a thin stream of smoke come
from the plane; then a little flicker. It seemed to fall so slowly. Then
it burst into flames and came down like a great comet."

"D----n!" we said: "if only that machine had been working right
yesterday."

We took our car down to the arsenal, and I left Sava to take it to bits
and get it opened out, for there had been a bit of a knock in the crank
case. The remains of the smashed aeroplane were piled in the yard, and
from the way it had twisted up without breaking one could see from what
beautiful metal the machinery was made. Some of the French experts
denied that the guns had hit it--giving as their reason that one of its
own bombs had exploded. But one of the engineers put his hand into a big
hole which was beneath the crank case and drew out a shrapnel ball. I
thought that would settle it, but the Frenchmen were not convinced. The
shells were bursting fifty metres too low, they said. Fifteen bombs had
fallen about the arsenal, and one man, a non-commissioned officer, had
been killed.

Met Hardinge and Mawson: they both saw the aeroplane fall, and were not
fifty yards from the place where it struck.

Walked back to the Stobarts' camp for lunch. A French aeroplane had come
over from Belgrade too late; now it rose slowly in the air and sailed
off. Saw the two dead aviators; both had evidently been killed at once,
for they were charred, not blistered.

Colonel Phillips, ex-Governor of Scutari, and English military attaché,
came up with the Italian attaché. A bomb had fallen just before the
colonel's house and missed his servant by a hair's-breadth. The Italian
was in a room opposite the Crown Prince's palace; he thought that the
falling machine was going to crash through the roof, but it fell in the
street not ten yards away. The camp itself was packing hard, for Mrs.
Stobart had just decided to form a "flying field ambulance."

Mr. Berry and I had a tent assigned to us.

October 4th. Awoke to sounds like some one hitting a board with a
mallet. Ran outside. One found the aeroplane from the little clouds of
shrapnel, for it was flying very high, and was like a speck. Clouds of
smoke were rolling from one quarter of the town, and we thought that a
big fire was beginning, but it was extinguished. Another aeroplane came
later. The guns began long before it could be seen. It dropped two bombs
over the powder factory, and two in the town. Mrs. Stobart ordered
everybody from the camp; but nobody left except the patients, who were
driven a mile out and dumped in a wood. A long procession of townsfolk
filed continuously by, running from the danger. The aeroplane dropped
two more bombs in the town, and came back flying right over the camp. It
was a queer feeling, staring right up at the plane, and wondering if
another bomb were not falling silently towards one.

I went down to the arsenal to see about the car; and Mr. Berry and Miss
Hammond went off to see the anti-aircraft guns. Mrs. Stobart had asked
me to go out on the Rudnik road to see a car which had broken down, and
had promised to send a motor to fetch me. Before we could leave, news
was brought that another aeroplane had been telephoned. Presently we
could hear the guns beginning. Hardinge turned up, and we looked out for
the machine. We saw the aeroplane coming straight towards us; everybody
rushed for the cellars, but I wanted to stay outside for the last
moment. Hardinge was with me. Suddenly I lost sight of the plane. I ran
farther out to look for it, and suddenly there was a report, and a great
column of smoke just outside the arsenal. There was another behind the
rifle shops, and another behind the boiler sheds. Now the aeroplane was
overhead. I heard a noise like tearing silk, and lay flat upon the
ground shouting to Hardinge--

"Lie flat, d----n you!"

It seemed ages before it burst. Dust and bits flew everywhere; the
windows all sprang out into the yard. I looked for Hardinge, but he was
unharmed. I had expected to be terrified, but I was feeling so bothered
about Hardinge that I had no time to think about myself.

We heard a shrill crying, "Oh--h! oh--h!"

I ran forward, crying to Hardinge, "A man's hurt!" He answered, "Is he?"
The dust was so thick I could not see at first, but as it cleared I
found a workman lying on back and elbows, his knees drawn up as though
he were trussed; his head waved from side to side, and he was uttering
spasmodic cries. I said to him, "Where? where?" and he placed a hand to
his stomach.

The man had been struck just below the ribs by a large piece of bomb,
blood was welling from the wound, so I pushed his shirt into it, and ran
back to the office. Mrs. Stobart's car had been brought by a lady and a
youth named Boon, who had both taken cover in the cellar; so I dug up
the girl, whose name I have forgotten, as I hoped she knew "first aid."
Together we ran to the man, leaving Boon to bring the ambulance.
"Bandages," we demanded. "Haven't any," answered the few Serbs who had
gathered round; "the first aid house has been blown to pieces." We
crammed our handkerchiefs into the place, and a cotton-wool arm pad
which was brought, and we then took off the man's own puttees and tied
him up with them. As we were doing this somebody cried--

"Aeroplanes returning."

Immediately every Serb and Austrian fled. The girl, Hardinge, and I were
left alone. It was a false alarm. With the returning crowd came a large
man, who was weeping.

[Illustration: BROKEN AEROPLANE IN THE ARSENAL AT KRAG.]

[Illustration: WHERE THE "PLANE" FELL.]

[Illustration: HOUSE NEAR THE ARSENAL DAMAGED BY BOMBS.]

"Oh, my poor brother! oh, my poor brother! What have they done to
thee? Why should this evil have befallen thee?"

As we finished tying him up, Hardinge said, "Is it any good lying down?"

I answered, "If this poor chap had been lying down he would not have
been hurt."

There was no stretcher, so we lifted the wounded man on a blanket into
the ambulance, which Boon had now brought. The girl and the brother
climbed within. I took the steering wheel. Boon wound up the engine, and
swung alongside me. The driving was a difficult problem. Whether to
drive fast and get to the hospital, or whether to go slow and spare the
wounded man as much pain as was possible? The road was awful: once it
had been laid with stone pavement, but many of the stones were missing,
and in so bad a condition was it that although several bombs had fallen
in the streets, one could not distinguish the bomb craters from the
ordinary holes in the road. At last I decided that as it was not a
fracture I would go as quickly as I dared. Above the clatter of the
machinery I could hear the weeping of the brother and the intermittent
cries of the wounded man, "Water, water."

"I think he's going," said the girl through the curtains.

At last we reached the hospital. We laid the man on the ground and the
doctors did all they could. But it was useless, the piece of shell had
cut in directly beneath the heart. In ten minutes he was dead. I turned
to the brother and laying both hands upon his shoulders said--

"Your poor brother was too badly hit. We could not save him."

He stared at me for a moment, not understanding. Then he turned and
flung himself down upon the body, weeping more bitterly than before.

I went to the ambulance and took it back to its place.

The aeroplane returning from the arsenal had flung three gratuitous
bombs at the camp itself, one had fallen in the Serbian hospital yard,
and had killed an Austrian prisoner; one had fallen in the top corner of
the camp field, but had not exploded. The third had missed, only by a
little, the room in which the two dead German aeroplanists were lying,
had plunged into the Stobarts' storeroom, and had burst in the last case
of marmalade which they possessed. It was an awful mess. Had it fallen
three yards to the left it would have killed the chief cook, who was
just on the other side of the wall.

I went back to the arsenal. None of the bombs had struck any important
part, almost all had fallen in open places, though one had burst on the
roof of the woodshed, only a few yards from the petrol store. Two cans
of petrol had been punctured by bits of shell, and Austrian prisoners
were hurriedly pumping them out. Almost half the work of the arsenal was
done by Austrian prisoners. Another bomb had fallen in the horseshoe
store, and inside horseshoes were everywhere, some even sticking in the
beams like great staples. I had no idea before that the bombs had such
force. Sava said he had been standing in a doorway and a bomb had
exploded quite close, a piece had whizzed by his nose and had torn down
the name board over his head. When he turned round to go on with the
work the aide had fled and never appeared again.

I met Dr. Churchin. He is one of the best Serbs I have yet met, a
philosopher. He was looking after the English units in Kragujevatz and I
learnt did it excellently, and with a devotion to his duties altogether
unusual. He told me that I had been nominated an honorary captain; but I
am under the impression that it is an honour I cannot by national law
accept.

We went in the afternoon in the car towards Rudnik to examine the one
which had broken down. I soon saw that nothing could be done on the
spot, and ordered it to continue its "bullocky" progress to the camp. In
the evening went off to the Government motor school, where I found my
old friend Ristich and Colonel Derrock; both these men are first-class
Serbs--jolly, keen and friendly.

October 5th. Our car not being finished, Mr. Berry and Sister Hammond
went back to Vrntze in a car lent by Colonel Derrock. I was to stay till
all the repairs were completed on ours. There was another scare of
aeroplanes, and the whole town emptied itself, families pouring by en
route for the country; but the planes did not come. I went down to the
arsenal and got on with the repairs. Dr. May lent me her camera and I
got some photos. Mrs. Stobart went off with her "flying field force,"
taking with her nearly all the men and almost all the cars: if the
hospital get many serious cases I imagined that they would be dreadfully
shorthanded.

In the night the two German aeroplanists were buried without military
honours. The Serbs said that they were assassins and deserved nothing.
Still, Kragujevatz is an arsenal.

October 6th. Another aeroplane scare; town emptied itself once more. Dr.
MacLaren and I rushed off to the anti-aircraft guns, hoping to get some
photos; but nothing occurred. Got the Rudnik car running by taking Mr.
McBlack's useless car to pieces. In the evening two sisters went to
Uskub. One of the sisters went to get her bag, and I took what I thought
to be a short cut to help her. I passed between the tents, and was
striding along, when--Plop! I found myself swimming in a deep tank of
water. The sister heard me fall, and ran back to the camp crying out--

"Help, help! The stranger is drowning in the bath-water sewage tank."

I clambered out, and hastily fled to my tent, where kindly souls brought
me an indiarubber bath and hot water. I also got some refugee pyjamas,
in which I wandered about for the rest of the evening. My clothes were
taken to the kitchen and hung over the big stove.

October 7th. Went to the arsenal in borrowed refugee clothes miles too
large. Worried the car till it worked. At lunch clothes dry. Got away by
three, Hardinge coming with us. Night came on before we got home. Our
car is a beastly nuisance in the dark, the lamps, electric and worked
from the magneto, only giving light when going at full speed, which is
impossible on these roads. I was just boasting to Harding that I had
never run into anything except the owl, when I hit a cow. Figures
appeared cursing from the darkness; we cursed back for allowing the
animal to stray; other figures appeared cursing on our side. The motor
was pushed back, the cow got up and walked off, and on we went. Found Jo
on night shift. Got some supper, fixed up a bed for Hardinge, and so
self to bed.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVI

LAST DAYS AT VRNTZE


Up till now Vrntze was undisturbed by the war; the fine ladies were
walking the streets much as usual, and were bringing pressure upon
Gaschitch, the commandant, to make us close one of our hospitals, so
that it might be reopened as a lodging-house. The chemist and Jan had an
amusing conversation about the uncle of Nicholas I. It seems he was a
great poet.

"Sir," said the chemist, earnestly, "I can assure you that he was one of
the greatest poets that ever has lived. Were Serbian a language as
universally spoken as is English, he would stand beside Shakespeare in
the world's estimation, if not before. The depth of his philosophy, sir,
it is astounding and so deep. There are passages in his poetry which I
have studied for weeks on end and never yet been able to understand."

The true explanation is that the great poet translated an old work of
German philosophy into Serbian, and very likely did not understand all
the original himself.

We got more letters urging us to return. Our studios in Paris and all
our work of the last eight years seemed in danger of being sold up. So
Jan went once more to the Chief. He asked us to stay until at least the
first batch of wounded arrived, for none of the others had had
experience of the receiving arrangements, and of the disinfecting. We
moved our beds and baggage to the school, which Jo was to take over as a
convalescent hospital.

By the way, one of our doctors had a queer soothsaying experience. She
was told that she was one day going to a foreign country with an S in
the name. She would be quite safe in her first job, but that she would
be offered a post in a large grey building from which if she accepted
she might not escape alive, but in any case would be flying for her
life, and that she and all her companions would suffer great hardships
and sleep on dirty straw in awful places. She was offered a job at the
Farmers' hospital in Belgrade. She refused. It is a great grey building,
and we now heard that Belgrade was being violently bombarded and all had
to escape. Rumours came of great German attacks on Shabatz and
Obrenovatz.

The next day Serbian refugees arrived from Belgrade itself: they said
that the town was in flames and that fierce fighting was taking place in
the streets. Posheravatz was deserted, and a great battle was raging
about its outskirts. There were reports that the King of Bulgaria had
abdicated and that the Germans at Chabatz had been defeated, leaving
8000 prisoners in Serbian hands. Neuhat came to Jan in great glee.

"We have captured a German major," he said, "and he says that never was
there a soldier like the Serb. He has fought English and French and
Russians, but he says our troops are the most wonderful of all."

"Jolly sensible chap," said Jan. "I'd say the same myself if I was a
prisoner."

Major Gaschitch told Dr. Berry that if the Serbian army retreated we
were to retreat with them. Blease and Jan got hard at work putting rope
handles to the packing-cases and labelling them for special purposes.
One of our lady doctors was valued in the morning. In the outpatient
department a question arose about marriage. A Serb patient said--

"I can marry any time I like. Pah! In Serbia one can get two maidens for
twopence, and three widows for a mariasch (1/2_d._)."

Everybody was now running about with maps, violently explaining the
situation to everybody else, and all explaining differently. Major
Gaschitch had fixed Novi Bazar as our probable haven, and Mr. Berry
borrowed our map to see if there were a direct road over Gotch mountain,
and suggested that Jan might get a horse and ride over to see. Alas,
only a fourth-class road was marked, and heaven knows what that may be
like: lots of country and choose for yourself probably. A woman was
brought in with what she said was a bullet through the breast; it
occurred during the celebration of the marriage ceremony, which lasted a
week. The girl was brought by her father, the bridegroom having rushed
off to the church to pray. The wound looked very like a dagger thrust.

The new slaughter-house was a fine erection. The walls were almost
finished and the roof was being assembled. One of the Austrian prisoners
had discovered a talent for stone carving, and Miss Dickenson was
designing a frieze for the door and on each side. There was a fine
ceremony--while we had been away--at the foundation, and Mr. Berry made
a speech in Serbian. The disinfector had also arrived and was soon got
into working order.

The news got better. The Austrians were now driven out of Belgrade with
immense slaughter, the whole line of the Danube and of the Save had
been reoccupied by the Serbs. Blease and Jan wondered if it were
necessary to go on with the rope handles. Our first wounded man arrived
in the evening, a non-commissioned officer, with a slightly wounded
thumb. He had arrived by train, asked in the town which was the most
comfortable hospital, and had walked up. We represented that we weren't
looking for thumbs, but had to put him up for the night; this meant the
whole business of washing, shaving, and disinfecting his clothes.

We heard that the French and English had arrived in Nish, 70,000 men,
and that they had been greeted with the wildest enthusiasm; but against
that was set the fact that Belgrade after all was not quite clear of
Austrians, in fact, they still held half the town, but that the "Swobs"
were not getting on at Chabatz. "Swobs" in Serbian are any of a Germanic
country, while in Austria it is a term of opprobrium, meaning "German."
One of our "Czech" orderlies said to Jo, pathetically--

"I never thought that I should be called a 'Swob.'"

Next day came a warning that two hundred wounded, serious cases, were to
be expected, so everything and everybody was in a rush. The bathrooms to
be cleaned, disinfecting-room and bags to be got ready, wards cleared
as much as was possible.

The wounded did not come, and the next day they did not come. The
chemist said that all the Austrians had been driven back, but that the
Bulgars had at last attacked. Mr. Berry thought the news rather serious,
and told us that Gaschitch had said that we must be prepared to move at
twenty-four hours' notice; so back we went to the work on the boxes.
Next day news was brought that the Bulgars had drawn back, and had said
that the Serbs had attacked them first, that the Powers had declared war
on Bulgaria, and that the Russians had bombarded Varna.

At last we got news that the wounded were really coming. We hurried into
our disinfecting garments--looking like pantaloons,--and scissors were
served out to all the assistants. It was dark before the first motor
load came.

The undressing-room was a large white-stone floored room with four long
plank beds covered with mackintosh; behind was the bathroom. The first
wounded man was pushed in through the window on a stretcher, a brown
crumpled heap of misery, and groaning. We laid him carefully on the bed
while the doctor searched for the wound. While she was examining him a
second was handed in. No need to examine this one. Bloody head bandage
and great blue swollen eyelids told plainly where his wound was. We
stripped the clothes as carefully as was possible from the poor fellows.
Those who were too bad to go to the bathroom were washed where they lay.
One orderly with soap and razors shaved every hair from each; and
several plied clippers on the matted heads. Outside was one electric
lamp which threw strong lights and darker shadows, making a veritable
Rembrandt of the scene, lighting up the white clad forms of the
assistants who were drawing out the stretchers, the big square end of
the ambulance car, and picking out from the gloom of the garden a rose
tree which bore one white rose.

The wounded were indescribably dirty, and their clothes in a shocking
state, all stiff with blood. Jo took charge of the clothes bags, seeing
that no man's clothes were mixed with any others. The men all seemed
dazed, each soldier seemed to have the same protest upon his mind. "This
wasn't the idea at all, I was not to be wounded. Why am I here?" One
suddenly felt the brutal inanity of modern warfare; one felt that if the
ones who had started this war could only be forced to spend three months
in a war hospital, receiving and undressing the fruits of their plots,
they would have a different view of the glory and honour of battle.

Each man had sewn in his belt some talisman to protect him from
danger--small brass or lead image or medal, bought from the village
priest.

There was confusion at first, for almost all were new to their tasks;
the barbers were carrying stretchers when they ought to have been
barbering; the clippers were scrubbing instead of doing their proper
work; but, nevertheless, it was marvellously rapid. The motor tore back
to the station, and by the time it had returned its first load had been
washed, shaved, arrayed in clean pyjamas, and either lay in bed in the
ward, or were waiting their turn outside the operating theatre.

Mr. Berry was hard at work: there were several cases shot through the
brain, one through the lungs, one through the heart, and one through the
spine; this latter was paralysed.

Some wounded came in carriages; it was very difficult to get them on to
the stretchers without giving them unnecessary pain, because of the
shape of the "fiacres." At last all were passed through.

Do not think us heartless if we rubbed our hands and said, "Some very
good cases, what!" for emotional pity can be separated from professional
pleasure, and if these things had to be we were pleased that the serious
ones had come to us; had not gone to a Serbian hospital.

Next day we sorted clothes. Every uniform had to be taken from its bag,
tabulated, searched for money or food, and repacked. They were swarming
with vermin, but we wore mackintosh overalls which are supposed to be
anathema to the beasties. More operations. One of the men had been hit
in the cerebellum, and was quite blind. The boy who had been hit in the
lungs prayed for a cigarette and an apple, he felt sure they would do
him good. We sorted more clothes. One of the men had a pocket full of
scissors--evidently regimental barber; another's pockets were crammed
with onions; a third had a half-eaten apple, as though the fight had
surprised him in the middle of his dessert. The cerebellum man wanted
his purse. We could not find it; after exhaustive inquiry found that the
lung youth had stolen it. Another patient claimed he had lost thirty-six
francs; so down we had to go once more, search his package--the
smelliest of the lot--and at last found the money pinned into the lining
of his coat, also a watch. Jan took them back to him, wound up the watch
and set it. The grateful owner said that the watch was an ornament, but
that he could not read it.

The French were never in Nish at all--all lies; but Austrian aeroplanes
had bombed it and killed several people. The Bulgarian comitaj cut the
line at Vranja, but had been badly beaten in a battle near Zaichar. The
flight over Gotch degenerated into a joke, and Jo was commissioned to do
a caricature of it.

Suddenly a refugee turned up, the hostess of the rest house in Nish. She
was very worried about the loss of her fifteen trunks, which she had had
to leave, and which contained all her family mementoes and miniatures.
She hoped that the scare would only last a few days. The Bulgars had
occupied Veles though, which was bad news. Another refugee lady from
Belgrade came in. More patients. Forty-nine for the "Merkur" hospital.
Lots of running about, but at last all were bedded.

A Serbian comitaj girl came in in the afternoon, looking for a lady
doctor. She was a fine upstanding creature with a strong, almost fierce,
face. There had been six of her, she said, but one had been killed. The
bombardment of Varna turned out to be a lie, but they said that all the
Bulgars at Vrnja had been surrounded. Major Gaschitch also said that if
Serbia could hold out till the 10th, something wonderful was going to
happen.

Our visitors had rather a hard time. One of them was trotting into the
little sitting-room of the hospital. She opened the door and started
back aghast. There was a man within clad in nothing but a large pair of
moustaches. She fled. Mr. Berry having nowhere to examine a stray
patient had occupied the room at an unlucky moment. More wounded were
expected, so we got into our war paint, and they arrived five hours
later than we had expected them. They came in "fiacres," and climbed off
very easily. We inquired, "Where wounded?" "Belgrade." "When?" "Three
months ago." Not a serious case amongst them, and we had heard that the
badly equipped hospitals at Krusevatz were crowded with the most
frightful cases. We were furious. A lot more wounded came to the "State"
café. None seriously hurt, and after examination one man had no wound to
show at all, nor shock, nor anything. He had simply run away. There were
several hand cases, some blackened with powder, proving that the poor
devils had shot themselves to get out of it. One man would not have his
hair cut because he said that he was in mourning for his brother, and
his hat was decorated with a crown of black lace. At the same time some
serious cases came to the main hospital; one man seemed to have been
shot the whole length of his body, the bullet entering at the shoulder
and emerging behind the hip. A small boy sat scratching. Jo said to him,
"Why dost thou scratch?" He answered with a shout of fatuous content,
"I have lice, I have lice," and scratched once more.

The disinfector was working overtime, clothes were poured upon us from
all the other hospitals. Another alarm that wounded were coming, but
they never came. In their place an English clergyman arrived from Krag.
News came of the fall of Uskub, and that Lady Paget had been captured
with all her staff. Next day the wounded came, many more than had been
expected. Jan got rather strong signs of inflammatory rheumatism
threatening, so he went to bed for a couple of days with salicylate.

The Serbian authorities were beginning to lose their heads. In the
morning they said that the "State" was to be made into a hospital for
officers, and chased all the patients out; in the afternoon they decided
that it was not, and chased back the patients--who had been divided
amongst the other hospitals. Thus they kept us busy and accomplished
nothing. In the evening another batch of wounded came in.

Nearly all the reports of the previous week were now confessed to be
lies. A Serbian minister had been dying in the town, and the good
stories were made up to keep him cheerful. Now he was dead the truth
leaked out. The Austrians and Germans were advancing on every side, the
Serbs making no resistance since Belgrade. The Bulgars had occupied the
whole of the line south of Nish. The French and English were advancing
with extreme difficulty. The Farmers' unit trailed into the town, no
conveyance having been arranged for them from the station. The Scottish
women were already here, having come in the night; they had to sleep
twelve or fifteen in a room. Next day a small contingent of the wounded
Allies arrived.

Sir Ralph Paget arrived in a whirl. Leaders of units appeared from all
sides, and a hurried conference was held.

Mr. Berry called a meeting at two. He said Paget had announced that the
game was up; that all members of units should have the option of going
home, and that he (Paget) was going to Kralievo to see about transports.
Jan got to work on the map, and decided that the best route out would be
one to Novi Bazar, and thence by tracks to Berane. There were villages
marked in the mountains which did not seem so high as those by Ipek,
also the road, if there were one, would be at least two days shorter.

Sir Ralph came back next day, and knowing that we had but lately
returned from Montenegro, he asked Jan a lot of questions about the
road, etc. Sir Ralph's latest decision was that all men of military
age--not doctors--should attempt to cross the mountains into Montenegro.
He could not say if any transport could be provided, or if there would
be any means of escaping from Montenegro, and in consequence he advised
no women to move, as they would be better where they were, than in
facing the risks of the mountains; they would not be in the same danger
as the orderlies, for whom internment was to be expected. Dr. Holmes
decided to accompany us, as he said he wasn't going to doctor Germans,
and he might be useful to the retreating Serbian army. Ellis also said
that he would come and would bring his car, which would help us at least
some of the way. Sir Ralph asked Jan to take charge of the party of the
English Red Cross, and we went back to our rooms to repack, for Jo had
already arranged things for internment, Mr. Blease decided to come with
us. Nobody knew what the dangers would be, or where the Austrians and
Germans were, and many doubted if it were possible to get through. The
season was getting late, and snow was daily to be expected. Some
imaginative people enlarged on "the brigands" and "wolves," but we did
not think that they counted for much. The chief problems were, if we
could get shelter each night, and could we carry enough food to support
us in case we could get none, which seemed very possible.

We got an order from Gaschitch for bread from the Serbian authorities.
We were going off into country, the real conditions of which nobody
knew, and our friends took leave of us, many expecting to see us back in
a few days. The Austrian prisoners were very sad at our going.

The station was dark and gloomy, the little gimcrack Turkish kiosk--like
a bit of the White City--was filled with Red Cross stoves and beds. Two
trains came in, but neither was for Kralievo; one was Red Cross and the
other for Krusevatz. A lot of boys, in uniform, clambered on board and
shouting out, "Sbogom Vrntze," were borne off into the night. Our
spirits fell lower and lower. We thought of the friends we were leaving
behind us, and of what we had before us. The reaction had set in,
intensified by the gloom and cold of the station.

Hours later the train arrived. The only third-class carriage was filled
to overflowing, people were standing on the platform and sitting on the
steps. We tried the trucks. All were crammed so full that the doors
could not be opened.

"You'd better go to-morrow," said the station-master.

"We're not going through that a second time," we said. "Can't we climb
on to the roof?"

We scrambled up. There were other men there, lying in brown heaps. We
made some of them move up a little, stowed our blankets and knapsacks,
and sat amongst them.

"Are you all right?" shouted the station-master.

"Yes."

"Good-bye, then. Lie down when you come to the bridges, or you'll get
your heads knocked off."

We lay down at once, taking no risks, not knowing when the bridges were
coming. Luckily the wind was with us, and the night was warm. The engine
showered sparks into the air, which fell little hot touches on to our
faces and hands. Later a little rain fell.

Kralievo at three a.m. We did not know the town so Jo stormed the
telegraph office. The officials tried to shut the door, but she got her
foot into it.

"When I ask you a polite question you might answer it," she said.

"You can get shelter next door," said one grumpily.

We tried next door. It was crowded, and the heat within was unbearable.
We saw a door in the opposite wall and opened it--back into the
telegraph office. There were people sleeping there already, so without
asking permission we dumped our baggage and lay down on the floor. The
officials said nothing.

After a while two French generals (or somethings) came in. They were
refused as we were, but they took no notice, unpacked their blankets and
lay down under the great central table. With them was a wife, she sat
miserably on a chair. The room got so stuffy when the door was shut that
she wished it opened; the draught was so bad when the door was open that
she immediately wished it shut. Unfortunately she got mixed: the Serbian
for open is very like the word for shut, and she used them reversed.
There was much confusion. Just as the officials were getting used to her
inversions, she corrected herself. More confusion. An English girl came
in, pushed aside the papers on the big table, and began to brew cocoa on
a Primus stove which she had brought with her. The officials looked
helplessly at each other. Jan recognized her as one of the Stobart unit
from Krag: she had got astray from her band, but was now rejoining them.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVII

KRALIEVO


We roused ourselves at seven a.m. A damp, chilly fog was hanging low
over the valley, it penetrated to the skin, and one shuddered. The
railway was congested, but train arrived after train, open trucks all
packed with men whose breath rose in steam, and whose clothes were
sparkling with the dew. We stepped from the station door into a thick
black "pease puddingy" mud, as though the Thames foreshore had been
churned up by traffic. Standing knee deep in the mud were weary oxen and
horses attached to carts of all descriptions, with wheels whose rims,
swollen by the mire, were sunk almost to the axles. Across the mud,
surrounded by shaky red brick walls, the District Civil Hospital showed
pale in the morning, and we made towards it, splashing.

We came to the lodge: an English girl was doing something to a kitchen
stove. She stared at us.

"Hullo!"

"We've just come from Vrnjatchka Banja," we explained.

She took Jo to the hospital, while Blease and Jan dropped their heavy
luggage and washed in a basin, provided by a Serb servant girl. Jo did
not return. Jan went to the hospital to look for her.

Crowds of men were at the door, crowds in ragged and filthy uniforms,
with bandages on arms, or foot, or brow, dirty stained bandages with
bloodstains upon them. Some of the men were crouching on the ground,
some were lying against the house, fast asleep. Somehow we got through
them. The passage was full of men, and men were asleep, festooned on the
stone stairs. The smell was horrible. Beyond a swinging glass door
Scottish women were hurrying to and fro bandaging the men as they
entered, and passing them out on the other side of the building. The
Serbs waited with the stoicism of the Oriental, their long lean faces
drawn with hunger, pain and fatigue. Now and again some man turned
uneasily in his sleep and groaned. A detachment of "Stobarts" had found
a lodging upstairs, in a bedroom with plank beds; amongst them we found
some old friends.

Leaving them we went into the village to look for a meal, back through
the mud. Soldiers, peasants, women, children, horse carts and bullock
waggons, all were pushing here and there, broken down and deserted
motor cars were standing in the middle of the road. In the great round
central "Place" confusion was worse, animals, carts, and refugee
bivouacks being all squashed together on the market place.

White-bearded officers with grey-green uniforms were gesticulating to
white-bearded civilians outside the Café de Paris. A motor rushed up,
disgorged three men in Russian uniform and fled. A small fat man vainly
endeavouring to attract the attention of a staff officer grasped him by
the arm; the staff officer shook him off angrily. Soldiers lounged
against the walls and peered in through the dirty windows....

Within, the big dark room was crammed. Opening the door was like turning
a corner of cliff by the seashore. Almost all, at the tables, were men:
officers, tradesmen, clerks, talking in eager tense words. We found
three seats. Nobody had anything to eat or drink. Three men came to the
table next to us. They exhibited two loaves of bread to the others, and
had the air of some one who had done something very clever. We were
famished.

Suddenly half the café rose and rushed to a small counter almost hidden
in the gloom of the far end. Coffee can be got, said some one. Blease,
who could get out the easier, went to explore. In a short while he
wandered back saying that he had got a waiter. A man came through
selling apples. We bought some. At last the waiter came.

"Café au lait," said we.

"And bread," we added, as he turned away.

"Nema," he answered, looking back.

"Well eggs, then."

"Nema."

"What have you got?"

"We have nothing but meat."

"No potatoes?"

"No."

We got a sort of Serbian stew, the meat so tough that one had to saw the
morsels apart with a knife and bolt them whole. As we were operating, a
soldier leaned up against our table, and stared at our plates with a
wistful longing. Jo caught his eye. She scraped together all our
leavings; what misery we could have relieved, had we had money enough,
in Serbia then.

We paid our bill with a ten dinar (franc) note. The waiter fingered it a
moment.

"Haven't you any money?" he asked.

"That is money."

"Silver, I mean."

"No."

He hesitated a moment. Then went away, turning the note over in his
hands. After a while he returned and gave us our change.

The day passed in a queer sort of daze of doing things; between one act
and another there was no definite sequence. The town itself was in a
sort of suppressed twitter, everybody's movements seemed exaggerated,
the eager ones moved faster, impelled by a sort of fear; the slow ones
went slower, their feet dragging in a kind of despondency. At one time
we found ourselves clambering up some steps to the mayor's office, in
search of bread. By a window on the far side of the room was a man with
a pale face, eyes red-rimmed from lack of sleep, and light hair:
Churchin. We ran to him.

"What are you doing here?" he said gloomily.

We explained.

"I don't think you can get any transport," he said; "but later I'll see
if I can do anything."

We thanked him. "But transport or no transport, we are going." Jan
showed him the bread order. He read it and pointed to the Nachanlik.

The Nachanlik read our order, scowled and passed it on to another man,
an officer. The officer read the order, looked us sulkily from head to
foot, then he pushed the paper back to us.

"We have only bread for soldiers."

"But--we are an English Mission."

"Only for soldiers here. We have nothing to do with English Missions."

Fearing that we had come to the wrong place we retired.

At another time we were climbing up back stairs to what had been the
temporary lodgings of the English legation. But it was empty and
deserted; Sir Ralph Paget had not yet come.

There were bread shops, but they were all shut and guarded by soldiers.
Jan saw some bread in a window. He went into the dirty café, which was
crowded with soldiers, some sitting on the floor and some on the tables.

"Whose bread?" asked he.

"Ours."

"Will you sell me a loaf?"

"We won't sell a crumb."

We bought some apples from a man with a Roman lever balance, and chewed
them as we went along.

At the hospital the "Stobarts" were packing up. A motor was coming for
them in the afternoon. We heard that Dr. May and the Krag people were at
Studenitza, an old monastery, halfway along the road to Rashka. On the
flat fields behind the station were another gang of "Stobarts," the
dispensary from Lapovo. One Miss H---- was in trouble, for thieves had
pushed their arms beneath the tent flaps in the night and had captured
her best boots.

"There are cases full of boots on the railway," said some one,
consoling.

"But those are men's boots," said another.

Part of the morning we spent sitting on the banks of the Ebar River and
watching the bridge, wondering if Ellis would come with his car. Ten
times we thought we could see it, and each time were deceived.

The French aeroplanes came in. They hovered over the town seeking a flat
place, finally swooping down on to the marshy plain on which the
"Stobarts" were encamped. They landed, dashing through the shallow
puddles and flinging the water in great showers on every side. As each
landed it wheeled into line and was pegged down. Behind them was a line
of cannons, the Serbian engineers were hard at work, smashing off their
sighting apparatus, destroying the breech blocks, and jagging the lining
with cold chisels. Some of the cannon were Turkish. All the morning,
through the noise of the town, the shouting of the bullock drivers, the
pant of the motor cars, and the steady tap, tap of the engineers'
mallets, came the faint booming of the battle at Mladnovatch, not
fifteen miles away.

After lunch we went again to the café. Again it was full, and we were
forced to wait for a table. Just as we sat down a woman with a drawn,
anxious face came up to us, clutched Jo by the arm and said eagerly--

"Is it true that you are going to Montenegro?"

"Yes," answered Jo. "If we can get there."

"Could you give me only a little advice, madame? You see we do not know
what to do. My husband--he is an old man, and he is an Austro-Serb. If
the enemy catch him they will hang him."

"I'm afraid he will have to walk," said Jo.

"But he is so old," said the woman, with tears in her eyes; "he is
fifty."

"We ourselves will have to walk," said Jo. "Make him a knapsack for his
food. Give him warm clothes. It is his only chance of safety. And," she
added, "the sooner he gets away the better, for in a little all the food
on the road will be eaten up, and one will starve."

The woman thanked us. "I will make him go at once," she said, and ran
out wringing her hands.

A Russian woman with a thin-faced man sat at her table.

"You are going to Montenegro?" she said.

We nodded.

"I too am going. I am a good sportswoman. I have walked fifty kilometres
in one day."

We looked at her well-corseted figure, her rather congested face, and
had already seen thin high-heeled shoes.

"I will come with you, yes?"

The little man interrupted. "Why do you say such things, Olga? You know
that you cannot walk a mile."

We pointed out that we were going to march across the Austrian front,
and that no one could tell us where the Austrians were exactly; that our
safety depended to some extent on our speed, and that the failure of one
to make the pace meant the failure of all. The little man drew her away.

In the afternoon a miserable fit of depression took us, but we pushed it
behind us. To the hospital for tea, taking with us a tin of cocoa and
some condensed milk, which the people lacked. Biscuits and treacle, the
treacle looted from the railway, where an obliging guard had said that
he could not give permission to take it, but that he could look the
other way. We heard the tale of Kragujevatz, of the camp and all the
buildings filled to overflowing. More aeroplane raids; and of the sudden
order to evacuate. All the wounded who could crawl were got from their
beds and turned into the street by the authorities to go: if they could
not walk, to crawl. A few Serb and Austrian doctors were left to guard
and watch those too ill to go; with them some Swedish and Dutch sisters,
and the Netherlands flag flying from the hospitals. Dr. Churchin seemed
to have been the good genius of the Missions, never flagging in his
efforts for them.

We heard that a Colonel Milhaelovitch was the bread officer. He lived
somewhere in the back of the big yellow schoolhouse at the end of the
street. After tea we wandered drearily down to seek him, gained
permission from a sentry, and clambered up some stone stairs. Jan saw an
acquaintance from the Nish ministry, asked him a question, and was
ushered ... straight into the Ministry of War. They seemed in a
frightful stew about something, an air of disorder reigned everywhere,
but somebody found time to look at the order.

"Nachanlik," said he.

"We've been there already."

"Well, go there again and say we sent you, and that they must give you
bread."

We were worn out by this. Jo went off to the plank bed which the
Stobarts had promised to her, while Jan and Blease to the tents, where
Sir Ralph's men were sheltering.

All the streets were edged with motionless bullock carts, in which men
were sleeping, and even in the mud between their wheels were the dim
forms of the weary soldiery. The two splashed across the marsh and found
the tents.

Rogerson and Willett were there; Willett was seedy. Another Englishman
named Hamilton, who had an umbrella which he had sworn to take back
with him to England. Also two Austro-Serb boys who had been acting as
interpreters.

West and Mawson were not there. Rogerson said that Sir Ralph had sent
them with Mrs. M----to see the road and conditions at Mitrovitza; nobody
knew when they would be back. We got two beds, but there were no
mattresses on the springs. Jan rolled up in his Serbian rug, but it was
loosely woven, and not as warm as he had hoped. Just not warm enough,
one only dozed. About eleven o'clock, Cutting came in with Owen,
Watmough, Hilder, and Elmer. They had come from Vrnjatchka Banja with
Dr. Holmes. Some one had told them that we had deserted them and had
gone off to Rashka on our own; they were cheered to find us still there.
After that we lay awake discussing details. None of them had realized
the difficulties of the road and the probable lack of food, though the
Red Cross men had brought with them a case of emergency rations. Jan
exposed his idea of the route; somebody said that there was some corned
beef and rice in a Red Cross train on the siding.

Intermittently in the silences one could still hear the sound of the
guns.

Next morning at breakfast Dr. Holmes came in. He had thought us gone,
and so had procured for himself and the sister who was with him, seats
in a Government motor which was going to Mitrovitza. We all splashed
across the marshy grass to the siding where the stores were. In the
empty trucks on the line families were camping, and some had fitted them
up like little homes. We found the truck, and with efforts dug out
twelve tins of corned beef, a case of condensed milk, one of treacle,
and two tins of sugar. We emptied a kitbag and filled it with rice.

The hospital was fuller than ever. The Scottish nurses were toiling as
quickly as they could, and each man received a couple of hard ship's
biscuits from a great sack, when his wounds were dressed. He immediately
wolfed the hard biscuits and lay down; in one minute he was asleep, and
the hospital grounds were strewn with the sleeping men. From time to
time sergeants came in, roused the sleepers, formed them into
detachments, and marched them off.

The Stobarts met us wringing their hands. There was no bread, nor could
they procure any. Jan took their order, and we promised to see what
could be done. As we passed the station we saw surging crowds of men,
from the midst came cries of pain, and sticks were falling in blows.

"Good Lord, what's that?" we cried.

We plunged into the crowd. Some of the men and boys were gnawing
angrily at pieces of biscuit which they held in their hands. The crowd
surged more violently, the sticks were plied with greater vigour;
presently the crowd fell back snarling. The ground which they left was
covered with the crumbs of trampled biscuit, and the soldiers drove the
crowd yet further back, beating with sticks and cursing. A bread sack
being unloaded from a waggon had burst, the hungry crowd had pounced ...
that was all. As we withdrew we saw the fortunate ones still gnawing
ferociously at the hard morsels which they had captured.

We took our passes to the mayor once more. He received us angrily.

"I told you yesterday," he said.

"The War Office sent us," said Jan, sweetly, "and said that you must
give us bread."

"I have no bread," said the mayor. "You must go to Colonel
Milhaelovitch."

We tramped back to the yellow school. There was no sentry, and a queer
air of forlornness seemed to pervade. We asked a loiterer for the
colonel's office. He pointed. We climbed yet another stair and found a
pair of large rooms; they were empty. Town papers were scattered on the
floor, one table was overturned.

A man lounged in. "Where is the colonel?" we asked.

"Ne snam bogami," he said, twisting a cigarette.

"Well, find out," said Jan.

He lounged away and presently returned with another.

"The colonel has evacuated," said the other; "he went naturally with the
Ministry of War to Rashka last night."

We went back in a fury to the mayor.

"You knew this," we cried angrily to him.

He shrugged his shoulders.

"Where can we get bread?"

He took up the passes and looked at them. His face lightened.

"This one," he said, turning to another, "is written--Give them bread to
the value of three francs. We will give them three francs."

"No you won't," said we; "you'll give us bread. You cannot leave these
English sisters to starve."

After some grumbling he said we could inquire at the "first army." We
made him write out an order; we also made him give us a clerk to
accompany us. He gave us a tattered old man whose toes were sticking
from his boots.

We presented both orders at the "first army." It refused at once. We
threatened it with the War Office and with the mayor. After some demur
it sent us across the town again to the "magazine" office.

At the magazine office we were more wily. We presented our little order
for three humble loaves. He first said "Nema," then admitted that there
was bread and that we could have it. We then showed the order for the
other loaves.

"No, no," he cried, "you cannot have all that bread."

We pointed out that it was not much for a whole mission. He still
refused. So Jo got up and made a little speech. It was a nasty little
speech, but they deserved it, for we had found that they had bread.

She pointed out that the English Missions had now been working in Serbia
for a year, gratis; that no matter if we got no transport we were going
to get to England, and that it would not look well in the English papers
if we wrote a true account of our experiences, saying that they had
allowed the English Missions to starve. The threat of publicity finished
him. He grumbling consented to give us ten loaves in addition to our own
to last for two days. Not daring to leave them, and to send an orderly
for them, we rolled them up in Jo's overcoat and staggered down the road
to the hospital.

On the way we met an old Serbian peasant woman. She walked for a while
with us, turning her eyes to heaven and crying--

"What times we live in. Only God can help, only God."

At the hospital we met Sir Ralph Paget. He told us that the Transport
Board had promised him ten ox carts for the morrow. Two large motor
lorries had turned up to take the two contingents of the "Stobarts."
They were packing in, and we asked them to take our holdall as far as
Rashka, for we were still distrustful of the ox carts. We had begun to
get into a habit of not believing in anything till it was actually
there.

An Englishman came suddenly in with a face purple with anger and
swearing. He was the dispenser from Krag who had been left at Lapovo to
bring on the stores.

"What's the matter?" we cried.

"Brought my motor from Lapovo with the hospital stuff," he said
furiously. "Left it out there on the road. Came in here to tell you
about it; and when I go back the cussed thing isn't there. Found all the
stores in a beastly bullock cart. The people said that a Serb officer
had come along, turned all our stuff out, and gone off with the motor. *
* * *."

There was nothing to be done, so we went on packing. An aeroplane was
seen in the distance; everybody watched it.

"Taube," said somebody.

The Taube sailed slowly round, surveying the town. It passed right
overhead. Everybody stared upwards wondering if it were going to "bomb,"
for we were just opposite to the railway station. But it passed over and
flew away. As it went guns fired at it, and many of the Serbs let off
their rifles. We have often wondered where all the bits of the shells go
to, for nobody ever seems to be hit by them, even when they are bursting
right overhead.

The motor gave several snorts, everybody climbed aboard. The driver let
in the clutch, there was a tearing sound from underneath, but the motor
did not go. One of the drivers clambered down, and after examination
said that it could not go on that day, and they immediately began to
take it to pieces. The aeroplane came back twice, sailing to and fro
without hindrance.

[Illustration: PEASANT WOMEN LEAVING THEIR VILLAGE.]

[Illustration: SERB FAMILY BY THE ROADSIDE.]

It is impossible to describe properly the feeling in the town: it was
like standing in the influence of high-pressure electricity, even in the
daytime the soldiers in their rags--but with barbarously coloured rugs
and knapsacks--were sleeping in the hedges and gutters. There were vague
rumours that Rumania and Greece had finally joined in; many seized upon
these statements as being true, and one found little oases of rejoicings
amongst the almost universal pessimism. We ourselves doubted the
reports. Sir Ralph's ox carts--in an interview with Churchin--dwindled
down to a possible two; but Jan got a letter in the evening saying that
there were ten country carts for the next morning. Six were for us and
four for the "Stobarts," and that we were to take the Indian tents with
us.

We went back to the tents early to get a good start next day. Rogerson
and Willett were sorting their clothes. Hamilton had decided, as he
could not walk, to go back to Vrntze with the Red Cross stores which
Paget was sending to the hospital. As we were turning in, Dr. Holmes
arrived. He had not got the seat in the motor, but was going next day.
Later two mud-bespattered figures came in. They were West and Mawson.

We questioned them eagerly, and although they were worn out they
answered all they could.

The road was passable. They had scarcely slept for four days, Mitrovitza
was already crammed with fugitives, and rooms were not to be found. On
the way back the motor was working badly; the mud was awful. Then the
petrol ran out. They stopped a big car which was loaded with petrol and
ammunition, and asked for some. They got a little, and as they were
going to start the big car suddenly burst into flames: some fool having
struck a match to see if the petrol was properly turned off. Great
flames roared up into the air, and it was a long time before the car
was sufficiently burnt down to pass it.

West said that it was a most marvellous picture.

A little farther on a tyre had burst, and they had been forced to come
back on the rims. They eagerly welcomed Jan's idea of the Novi Bazar
route, feeling sure that if they once got to Mitrovitza it would be long
before they got away, and very doubtful if they could get lodging there.

Again we could hear the guns in the night, and news had come in that
Krag had been occupied and that the German cavalry were making towards
Kralievo.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XVIII

THE FLIGHT OF SERBIA


The men were up before three-thirty to strike the tents, having slept
but little. Breakfast was prepared and waiting at five-thirty in the big
hospital bedroom; but the women ate of it alone.

Jo sallied forth to the camp, anxious to know what had happened. She
found a testy little company. For two hours they had been struggling in
the dark with tents and waiting for the carts and for a policeman, as
all the riff-raff of the town was gathering to loot our leavings.

At last the carts were run to earth standing outside the hospital in a
line--ten little springless carts in charge of a stupid-looking corporal
who had misunderstood his orders. He moreover refused to move, saying he
"had his orders."

The indefatigable Churchin was found, and sent him off with a flea in
his ear. When he arrived at the camp we found a woman and household
luggage in one of the carts. He said it was his wife, and objected to
our putting anything into that cart. We told him he would have to lump
it, and he got sulky; as each extra package was put on a cart he said
that it would break to pieces. Certainly the tents were very heavy, but
we had been ordered to take them. When the carts were loaded up to the
last degree they moved slowly through the mud and drew up at the
hospital. We were sadly overladen. Our party consisted of Mawson, West,
Cutting, Rogerson, Willett, Blease, Angelo, Whatmough, Elmer, Owen, and
Hilder--the last four being our friends of the railway journey from
Nish. We were thirteen. Temporarily with us also were the two little
Austro-Serbian boys. The other four carriages were occupied by a doctor
and three members of the Stobart unit, two "Scottish Women," their
orderly and a Russian medical student who had been a political prisoner.

Leaving the town was a slow business, as it was being evacuated. Our
little procession proceeded very slowly. Most of us walked. Jo drove
with two of the Stobarts, watching from a seat of vantage the packed
masses of people who wormed their way in and out between the ox carts.
The road was blocked by some gigantic baking ovens on wheels. Hundreds
of boys, big seventeen-year-old boys with guns, and little limping
fellows from thirteen to sixteen, wearing bright rugs rolled over their
shoulders, were dragging along in single file. Their faces were white,
and their noses red, sergeants were beating the backward ones along with
a ramrod. One of them said--

"I have eaten nothing for three days--give me bread." We had no bread,
but we discovered some Petit-Beurre biscuits, and left him turning them
over and over.

The whole town buzzed: motor cars, surrounded by curses, insinuated
their way through the crammed streets; whips were cracking, men were
quarrelling but all had their faces turned towards the road to Rashka,
which we realized would be as full as at straphanging time in the Tube.
The boys passed us, then we passed them. They passed us again. Hundreds
of Austrian prisoners were being hurried along, goodness knows where.
Neat young clerks, suit case in hand, elbowed their way through the
crowd. Young staff officers were walking, jostled by beggars. Jo called
to an old man who was driving a cart full of modern furniture, his face
drawn into wrinkles of misery--

"Where are you going?"

"Ne snam," he answered, staring hopelessly before him.

Wounded men were everywhere, tottering and hobbling along, for none
wanted to be taken prisoners. Some had ship's biscuit, which they tried
to soften in the dirty ditch water, others were lapping like dogs out
of the puddles. Sometimes a motor far ahead stuck in the mud, and we had
to wait often half an hour until it could be induced to move. Gipsies
passed, better mounted and worse clad than other folk, some of them half
naked. Many soldiers had walked through their opankies and their feet
were bound up with rag. Why in this country of awful mud has the opankie
been invented? It is a sole turned up at the edges and held on by a
series of straps and plaited ornamentations useless in mud or wet, which
penetrates through it in all directions.

We arrived at an open space and halted for lunch. Water had to be
fetched. It trickled from a wooden spout out of the hill and before our
cooking pot was filled we were surrounded by thirsty soldiers, who were
consigning us to the hottest of places for our slowness. Cutting
displayed a hitherto buried talent for building fires. We unpacked the
food and soon a gorgeous curry was bubbling in an empty biscuit tin with
Angelo, Sir Ralph Paget's chef, at the spoon. A leviathan motor car
lurched by containing all that was left of the Stobart unit. Another
monster passed, piled with Russian nurses and doctors. A face was
peeping out at the back, eyes rolled upwards, moustaches bristling. Was
it? Yes, it was--"Quel Pays"--but he did not recognize us.

[Illustration: THE FLIGHT OF SERBIA.]

The baking ovens appeared again, and we felt we had stayed long enough.
Some of our party were very fagged after their various adventures since
leaving Nish, so they climbed on to the carriages wherever there was a
downhill. The road wound up a narrow stony valley down which was flowing
a muddy stream. The trees on our side of the river were still green, on
the other bank they were bright orange, blood red and all the tints of a
Serbian autumn. The road full of moving people was like another river,
flowing only more sluggishly then the Ebar itself. For us in future, the
autumn will always hold a sinister aspect. These trees seemed to have
put on their gayest robes to mock at the dreary processions. At
intervals by the roadside sat an ox dead beat and forsaken by its owner
as useless.

Dusk came, bringing depression; the travellers on the curly road looked
like mere shades. Coat collars went up and hands were pocketed. Little
camp fires began to twinkle here and there on the hillsides. We came to
a large open space where many fires blazed, respectfully encircling a
French aeroplane section. Opposite was a high peak topped by a Turkish
castle. There we wished to halt, but the corporal said we must push on,
as he wished to get food for the horses. After we had passed the castle
the dusk grew rapidly darker and the road narrower and more muddy.
Although camp fires twinkled from every level space, the never ending
stream of fugitives seemed to grow no less. Darkness only added to the
tragic mystery of the flight. The bullock carts poured along, the
soldiers crowded by.

A horse went down, the owner stripped the saddle off, flung it into a
cart and cursing stumbled on into the darkness. The carts following took
no notice of the poor horse but drove over it, the wheel lifting as they
rolled across its body. We shouted to the owner; but he was gone, so we
turned one or two of the carts off, and made them go round. But we could
not stay there all night. The horse was too done, and too much injured
by the cruel passage to move, so Jan reluctantly pulled out his
"automatic" and, standing clear of its hoofs, put two bullets through
its brain. It shuddered, lifted two hoofs and beat the air and sank into
a heap.

On we went progressing for mile after mile in the mire, but never a
house did we see, nor a spot to camp on. At last the corporal gave up
the quest for hay, and we were faced with the problem of spending the
night on a narrow road bounded on one side by cliffs beneath which ran
the Ebar, and on the other by an almost perpendicular bank. The night
was black, the mud a foot deep, and a stream ran across the road. The
carriages drew up in single file and we discussed the sleeping problem,
while Cutting cooked bovril on an ill-behaved Primus stove. Our drivers
had to sleep on the carts. The women also had carts to sleep in; and the
Scottish women offered Jo a place in their already well-filled carriage.
The men were fitted somehow into the rest of the carts, while Jo, Jan,
and Blease found a ledge below the road, and though it was very
squelchy, they spread a mackintosh sheet and rolled up on it in their
rugs.

No sooner were they really settled and sleeping than a voice said,
"You'll have to get up: an officer says the carriages must move on--the
King is coming." It was West. We sat up. Between us and the dim lights
of the carts the black shadows of the crowds passed without end.

"I'll go and talk to them," said Jo; and unrolled herself, struggled and
fumbled with her boots and floundered into the blackness, where a
mounted officer was delivering orders. Shouts could be heard, lights
waved, horses whinnied, splashing their feet in the puddles as they were
being violently pulled here and there, and our poor little carts were
moving ahead into obscurity. Jo told him they were a Red Cross
party--that the carts were small, and couldn't they stay where they
were? The officer inspected the poor little carts, made his best bow,
and said, "Yes, they can stay."

But the corporal did not listen to Jo's orders. He belonged to a country
which rates women and cattle together, and the carts moved relentlessly
on. With difficulty Jo found the ledge again on which Jan was sitting
with the rugs, talking to the scenery in a manner which was not pretty.

Blease came up, and the three of us shouldered the things and stumbled
off to find the vanished carriages, which were half a mile down the
road. Jan flung his baggage on to somebody and soundly boxed the
corporal's ears, calling him a "gloop." Instantly the corporal felt that
"here was a man he could really understand," and from that moment became
a devoted adherent, studying our slightest whim, and at intervals humbly
laying walnuts before us.

A man came up to Jan.

"I believe that man is drunk," said he; "I said that your carts might
stand."

"Who are you?" said Jan.

"I was once the conductor of the Crown Prince's orchestra," he said;
"now I am traffic superintendent. It is difficult. I had a horse, a
jolly little brown horse, but he gave out and I had to leave him behind
on the road." There were tears in the man's voice. "He was a good
horse, but it was too hard for him. Now I have to walk."

"I shot your horse," said Jan. "They were driving over its body."

"He was a nice horse," said the man again, "a nice horse, and now I have
to walk. Well, good-bye, you can rest here."

He splashed away in the mud.

Our new sleeping place was worse: the mud was deeper, the road narrower.
Jo tried to escape the mud and made for the roadside, but the ground
moved under her and some muttered curses arose. She was walking not on
grass but on crowds of sleeping boys, and very nearly trod on a face. We
settled down again on our mackintosh sheet but did not sleep. Some
soldiers were firing off guns and throwing bombs into the river all
night. Near us lay Owen, who coughed for a couple of hours, after which
he gave up the spot as being too wet, and lay in a cart on Whatmough's
face.

It rained, Jo had the fidgets, and Jan expostulated. The mackintosh was
too small for us and we got gloriously wet. It is a curious feeling--the
rain pattering on one's face when trying to sleep. By the time one
becomes accustomed to the monotony of the tiny drops--_splash_ a big
drop from a tree. Water collects in folds of hat or rug, and suddenly
cascades down one's neck.

At four in the morning the corporal crept up submissively to ask if we
might move on, as the horses were cold and hungry. Only too glad, dark
as it was, we rolled up our damp bundles and put them in the waggons
with the sleeping people, who awoke, pink-eyed and puzzled at the sudden
progress forward of their uncomfortable beds. Whatmough, who was
convinced that the bombs and gunshots of the night before were spent
Austrian shells sailing over the hill, said--

"That's the first time I've ever liked a fellow sleeping on my face."

One of the Stobart nurses, who had used the remains of the hay as a
pillow, had been awake all night trying to prevent a hungry horse from
eating her hair along with the hay. With determination she had donned a
Balaklava helmet and trudged along all day in it, even later when the
sun came out. Blease, too, started the chillsome dawn in a Balaklava
wearing shawlwise a rug that had been made of bits of various coloured
woollen scarfs. Jan used as a protection from the rain Jo's white
mackintosh apron filleted round his head with a bit of string and
dangling behind with a profusion of tapes and fasteners.

Under his khaki great-coat and about a foot longer he wore a white
jaconet hospital coat. Jo had a pair of roomy ski boots into which she
had fitted two pairs of stockings; one had been knitted for her by a
Serbian girl, and they were so thick and hard that no suspender would
hold them up, so they stood, concertinawise, over the boots. One of our
drivers, a witch-faced old man, had a dark red cloak with a peaked hood;
and West having lost his hat had donned a Serbian soldier's cap, which
he was taking away as a curiosity. His arm was giving him pain. It was
very red and inflamed and no one knew what was the matter with it.

We travelled for an hour or so, and then everything on the road came to
a standstill--something was in the way. Half an hour passed, nothing was
done. Several miles of drivers were talking, gesticulating, and
blaspheming; so Jan took on the job of traffic superintendent, and after
a time, with a little backing here and twisting there, the problem was
solved and we moved on. Still no hay stations could be found, and we
were also hungry, having had no breakfast. We passed a mound covered
with thousands of Austrian prisoners waking up in the twilight. Another
hill was black with boys. Still no station. Then we saw some haystacks
being taken to pieces by various drivers. Our ten coachmen ran to the
stacks and came back with loads of hay which they packed in the carts.
In five minutes the haystacks existed no more.

"Better not leave that good hay for the Swobs," said the corporal, as he
whipped up the horses. We passed a dressing-station. It was a sort of
laager of ox carts over which flew the red cross. Wounded soldiers were
sitting and lying on the grass everywhere, while doctors and nurses were
hurrying to and fro with bandages and lint.

Water was difficult to find. At last we stopped at the top of a hill in
a furious wind. The water which we got from a stream looked filthy, but
we boiled it thoroughly in a biscuit tin, and Angelo again presided over
a magnificent curry filled with bully beef, while we hit our toes on the
ground to keep warm. A wounded soldier was brought up by a friend. He
had not been attended to for days, and we did the best we could for him.

A carriage passed laden with two tiny boxes--a policeman on either side.
Although the boxes were small the carriage seemed so heavy that the
horses could scarcely drag it, and two well-dressed men who were riding
on the carriage often had to get out and push. We wondered if the boxes
were filled with gold. The dreary processions of starving boys shuffled
up again; some were crying, some helping others along, one had an
English jam tin hanging round his neck. Sir Ralph Paget appeared in a
motor car, loaded with packages and three other people. We stopped him,
and he told Jan that at Novi Bazar he could get no information of the
path which Jan suggested, and added that he advised us to come to
Mitrovitza. The Scottish women were to give up the idea of a
dressing-station in Novi Bazar and to stop at Rashka. The Serbs had told
him that there was a good chance of Uskub being retaken, in which case
we could all go comfortably to Salonika by rail. In the other case,
there were three roads out of the country from Mitrovitza, which he
thought better than trusting to one road, if it existed.

Jan told him that the carriages were giving way under the strain of the
tents, two of the axle struts having broken; and he suggested that if we
did not jettison the tents, some of the carriages would probably never
get as far as Rashka. Sir Ralph told him to do what he thought best.

So we pitched the two heavy tops and the long bamboo poles overboard,
keeping the sides.

"Oh, what are you doing with our tents?" said one of the Scottish
nurses.

This was complicated! We understood the tents were Sir Ralph's.

All the men swore they were Sir Ralph's tents, they had seen them at
Nish. The "Scottish Woman" said she knew the tents well, and they had
cost £50 each. The men from Nish still claimed the tents, and said that
war was war and they had left thousands of pounds' worth of stores,
tents, etc., and had been obliged to discard even motor cars.

"And very extravagant it was of you," she said.

Jan pointed out that if we did not leave the tents we should very
shortly have to discard both tents and carts, which would be even more
extravagant.

She reluctantly cheered up, and we drove away in the sunshine. Before we
turned the corner we could see an excited mass of soldiers, peasants,
and boys rushing to the tents with their clasp knives. Perhaps, as
coverings, they saved many people's lives on the cold nights to come.

[Illustration: RETREATING AMMUNITION TRAIN.]

More and more exhausted oxen were to be seen lying by the roadside. A
huge cart drove over one. We all arose in our seats, horrified--but the
old ox was all right, still chewing the cud. Over the cliff lay the
smashed remains of a cart--its owners were flaying the dead horse. A
peasant with bowed head led his cart past us. Drawing it was one ox--its
partner was in the cart, lifting its head spasmodically--finished.
Quantities of carts passed us filled with furniture, baths, and
luggage. A smartly dressed family was picnicking by the roadside,
sitting on deck-chairs. Colonel P---- and Admiral T---- slipped by in a
shabby little red motor. They stopped and told us they were going to
Rashka. It was good to see English faces again. A familiar figure went
by. It was the brave young officer from Uzhitze. We gave a lift to a
footsore lieutenant, who laughed as we trudged in the mud.

"Ah, English and sport," he said.

Crowds were congregated round a man who was carrying over his shoulder a
whole sheep on a spit and chopping bits off for buyers. On a hillside a
woman was handing out rakia. We thought she was selling it, but were
told that it was a funeral and she was giving rakia to all who wanted
it. Starving Austrian prisoners rushed for a glass and were not refused.
The Crown Prince passed, touching his hat to fifty kilometres of his
people. This time we were not going to be caught by the darkness, so we
stopped near a village at half-past three. The sides of the two tents
made good shelters for us. They were set up, looking like two long
card-houses, and we used bits of canvas for flooring, very necessary, as
it was so wet. Our fires were quickly made with superfluous tent pegs,
and the rice bag was again drawn forth. A groaning soldier with
bloodstained bandage asked us to help him. His arm had not been dressed
for some time. The doctor with us at first thought he had better not be
tampered with; but finally agreed to look at his wound, which was
bleeding violently.

She tore up a towel and bound him up tightly. He said he was going to
Studenitza, a long day's walk, though he was nearly fainting.

On the hill opposite was a huge encampment of boys. As the darkness grew
all disappeared but the light of the fires. It looked like an ancient
battleship with the portholes on fire. We slept, the women fairly
comfortably, but the men were overcrowded.

Heavy rain came on and poured through the top of the card houses.

"Now I know what the men suffer in the trenches," said a very young
girl, when she awoke in a pool of water.

"Guess you don't--they'd call this clover," said a sleepy voice.

Looking our oddest we trudged off in the gloom and wet of next morning,
leaping across rivulets of water which hurtled down the roads. West's
arm was worse, Willett was recovering from a bad chill, Mawson had not
yet got a decent night's rest for a week--every one longed for a house.

"Dobra Dan," said a voice. It was the friend of the wounded man we had
bound up the first day.

"Where is your friend?" we asked.

"I lost him," he answered.

We climbed for three hours then waited, blocked. A military motor had
stuck deeply in the mud and the wheels were buzzing round uselessly, so
we helped to dig her out. Every one's inside cried for breakfast, and
when at last we found a swampy plain, Whatmough and Cutting flung
themselves upon an old tree trunk and cut it up for firewood.

We always had "company" to these picnic meals, hungry soldiers, mere
ragbags held together by bones, crept around us and learnt for the first
time the joys of curry and cocoa.

As we came round the corner into sight of the town a large block of
temporary encampments stretched away beyond the river to our left.
Beyond them was a flat plain on which was a large tent with a red cross
painted over it. High behind the town towered a grey hill on which was a
white Turkish blockhouse, for though where we were driving had always
been Serbia, Rashka lay just on the boundary. We drove into a narrow
street, presently coming to a stop where two motor cars blocked the
way.

The Commandant from Kragujevatz, who had promised transport to all
English hospitals, was standing on the road. He seemed very flustered
and bothered lest we should want him to do something for us. We assured
him we wanted nothing except bread, for neither we nor our drivers had
had bread for three days. The colonel shrugged his shoulders and made a
face.

"You might get it perhaps at the hospital."

Another officer, in a long black staff coat, laughed. He pulled a hard
biscuit out of each pocket, looked at them fondly and pushed them back
again.

"I've got mine anyway," he said. "Bread is ten shillings a loaf if you
can buy it."

Annoyed by the colonel's manner Jo began to mount her high horse and
became blunt. He was instantly suave.

He seemed dismayed at our idea (to which we still held) of going to Novi
Bazar before Mitrovitza to see if really no route existed there.

"Impossible," said he; "bridges are broken between Rashka and Novi
Bazar, and there is no route through the mountains from there."

We remembered that the country had been under Turkish rule there years
before, and guessed that probably the Serbs had not yet been able to
exploit new and lonely routes. At every side in the streets were faces
we knew, the head medical this and the chief military that.

Our personal carts went off in charge of the corporal, who was looking
for bread from the Government, for of course all bread shops were shut
permanently.

The Scottish sisters had not found a refuge, and messengers kept on
coming back saying this place was full and that place had no room.

Colonel G---- became even less likable. It seemed as though there were
no organisation of any kind in the town. At last, when dark had well
fallen, a man said a room had been cleared for them in the hospital. The
motor cars moved slowly off and we told the rest of our carts to follow,
as Colonel G----said we might get bread at the same place. We stumbled
after them through pitch black streets, so uneven that one did not know
if one were in the ditch or on the road itself; one lost all sense of
direction and only tried not to lose sight of the flickering lights of
the carts. Jo at last climbed into one, and the carts rumbled over a
wooden bridge and began to go up a steep hill. We came suddenly to a
rambling wooden house and our carts dived into a deep ditch. Jo leapt
off just in time to save hers from turning right over. Crowds of wounded
Serbians were standing at the foot of a rickety outside staircase. Above
was a dressing-station, and a dark smelly room with no beds, which was
to be the sisters' home. We could get no bread and so went out once more
into the dark. We did not know where our carts had gone, but some one
said if we went in "that" direction we should find them. On we went
uphill, losing our way in a maize field. In front of us were hundreds of
camp fires. At the first we asked if they had seen the English. They
shrugged their shoulders in negative. We asked at the next; same result.
We had the awful thought that we should have to search every camp fire
before we found our people, but luckily almost fell over Mawson, who had
been fetching water. We were going in quite the wrong direction and but
for this lucky meeting might have wandered for hours.

A good fire was blazing in front of the tents. An Austrian prisoner cut
wood for us in exchange for a meal. He came from a large encampment
whose fires were blazing near by. Dr. Holmes and a sister emerged
through the smoke; they had at last got a cart and horse. With them was
an Austrian subject flying for his life. He had lived for years in
Serbia, his sympathies and ancestry were Serbian, but if the Austrians
got him he would be hanged. We wondered if it was the husband of the
frantic woman at Kralievo, but did not ask.

One went early to bed these nights. The men spread out into two
card-houses while Jo was hospitably given a real camp-bedstead in a
corner of the Stobarts' kitchen, on the floor of which slept their men
and also West, whose arm was getting worse.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XIX

NOVI BAZAR


We awoke to find where we were. The little encampment which we had seen
to our left on entering the town, was now far on our right. The flat
plain--where was the large tent with the red cross painted over it--had
been our bed, the tent behind us; to our right was the brown hill topped
by the old Turkish blockhouse; and in front a cut maize field with its
solid red stubble sloped directly to the river, beyond which lay the
village massed on the opposite slope up to a white church. Immediately
below us on the river edge were the roofs of the "Stobarts'" refuge and
of the Scottish women's hospital. Poplar trees in all the panoply of
autumn sprang up from the valley with their tops full of the blackest
crows, who cawed discordantly at the dawn. Our fire had gone out, but
the Austrian had left enough wood, another was quickly started; but we
found that Angelo in making his curries had melted all the solder from
the empty biscuit tins and not one would hold water. So there was a
hurried transference of biscuits from a whole one.

From where we sat sipping our cocoa, we could see the hurried coming and
going of motors in the main square, and groups of bullock waggons and
soldiers about the fence of the church. A great street which split the
village in two from top to bottom--the old Turkish frontier--was almost
empty. The corporal proposed to visit the military commandant in search
of hay and bread. So Jan dragged on his wet boots and set off with him
down the hill, collecting Jo from the "Stobarts" on the way.

We crossed the rickety wooden bridge, passed between the _alfresco_
encampments--like travelling tinkers--of waggoners and soldiers which
lined the roads, up the great frontier street and so into the square.
All that now was SERBIA was concentrated in this little village. Private
houses had suddenly become ministries; cafés, headquarters; and shops,
departmental offices. The square was the central automobile station, and
cars under repair or adjustment were in every corner. Beneath the church
paling a camp of waggoners had a large bonfire and were cooking a whole
sheep on a spit. Austrian prisoners with white, drawn faces were
wandering about, staring with half unseeing eyes; a Serbian soldier was
chewing a hard biscuit, and a prisoner crept up to him begging for a
corner of the bread; the soldier broke off a piece and gave it to him.

About the gate of the commandant's office were gathered Serbs and
Austrians all waiting for bread. We pushed our way in. The hay was
quickly arranged, but the bread was another matter.

"We have no bread," said the commandant.

"But," we objected, "all those men waiting outside. They would not come
here if you had no bread."

The commandant pulled his moustache.

"We have bread only for soldiers."

There was a sudden commotion outside. The door was burst open; two
soldiers entered dragging with them a man--a peasant; his eyes were
staring, his face blanched. We then noticed that he was holding his
shoulders in a curious manner, and realized that his arms were bound
with his own belt. The two soldiers pushed him into an inner room, but
the officials were busy, so he was stood in a corner.

"What has he done?" we asked.

"We have only bread for soldiers," repeated the commandant. Bread was
evidently the most important.

"We have a Government order."

He scanned it, pounced upon the three franc phrase and offered us money.
We pointed out that bread was indicated to the value--

"We have no bread for the English," he said at last.

Jo once more made the nasty little speech which we had found so
effective at Kralievo. It worked like a charm. An enormous sack filled
with loaves was dragged out and from it he choose three. We mentioned
the man once more. The commandant shrugged his shoulders.

"He's going to be killed," he said. "Some soldiers looted his yard and
he shot one."

He then asked the corporal if he would take flour instead of bread. The
corporal agreed, adding that in that case, of course, they would get a
bit more.

"Of course, you won't," said the commandant.

We sent the corporal back to the camp with the loaves, and with a little
trouble found the house where Colonel P---- and Admiral T----had
lodgings. It was a gay little cottage, and both were at breakfast. They
welcomed us and generously offered us their spare eggs, though eggs were
scarce. The admiral had a large-scale map--made, of course, by
Austria--and we hunted it for our road. Paths were marked quite clearly,
and houses at most convenient intervals. It seemed a far superior path
to the Ipek pass, both regarding shelter and length.

"But," we said, "Sir Ralph suggests that we go to Mitrovitza, because
the Serbs say that Uskub will fall in a few days."

"I should get out of the country as soon as you can," said one.

"It is exceedingly unlikely that Uskub can fall," said the other. But
they promised us as definite information as they were allowed to give if
we would return for tea, by when the aeroplane reconnaissance should
have come in.

We went back to the camp with the news.

Colonel G---- came up and tried to wipe out the impression which he had
made the evening before. He repeated that Uskub must certainly fall
within the week, and that we should be very silly to go off to Novi
Bazar, which we could never reach because the bridge had been washed
away.

All the hill behind was crowded with Austrian prisoners. They had
received one loaf between every three men, and said that it had to last
three days. They did not know where they were going. Blease went through
their lines, and at last found an old servant--a Hungarian. He was a
stoic.

"One lives till one is dead," said he.

The hospital was doing a brisk trade in wounded: sisters and doctors
both hard at work. The "Stobarts" were resting, and had built a camp
fire outside the door of their hovel. We got lunch ready, ruining
recklessly another biscuit tin. While we were eating it a Serb came
near.

"I am starving," he said.

We gave him some curry and rice. He devoured it.

"To-morrow," he said, "I go back to commando."

We pointed to his hand, which was bound in dirty linen.

"But?"

"It is better to go back though wounded than be starved to death."

We also held a court of justice. A driver complained that one of the
Englishmen had given him a pair of boots and that the corporal had taken
them.

"CORPORAL!!"

He came grinning. We exposed the complaint.

"Certainly the man had a pair of boots," said he; "but he has them no
longer. Now, they are mine, I have taken them."

"But they were given to him."

"But I have taken them. I needed new boots." He exhibited his own, which
were split.

We told him that possession by capture was not recognized in our circle,
and ordered immediate restitution. He agreed gloomily, no doubt feeling
that the foundations of his world were falling about his ears, and what
was the use of being a corporal anyway?

In the afternoon we sought out the motor authorities, finding our old
friends Ristich and Derrok in command. They easily promised us transport
for Sir Ralph Paget's box and henchmen--no trouble at all they said. Yet
had we not known them personally we might have waited a month without
help. One is irresistibly reminded at every turn that the Near East
means the East near the East and not the East near the West.

We went to the English colonel's, but no news was yet forthcoming, and
we were, after a jolly tea, invited back at eight.

The camp was in darkness by the time we reached it once more. The fire
lit up the men sitting about it, and the two inverted V's of the tent
entrances; very faintly behind could be seen the outline of the line of
little tented waggons. We had collected an additional member, Miss
Brindley of the "Stobarts." She was very keen to get home, as her
parents were anxious, and both her brothers at the front. Jo gave one
look at her and said "Certainly." She had rushed immediately into the
town and had laid in a stock of beans and lentils, as her contribution
to the common stock. They were all she could buy.

After supper back to the colonel's, and at last got definite news. It
was unlikely that Skoplje would fall, and very little use loitering in
hopes. The colonel advised Jan to get his party out by the best route
possible, and we took a grateful farewell.

Coming back to the camp Jan had a nasty half-hour. Should we go by
Mitrovitza, or should we go by Berane? In the first case there was the
long route, the difficulty of getting lodgings and of transport, the
risk of falling behind the Serbian General Staff, and of finding the
country bare, the high passes of Petch and the snow; Willett was only
just recovering from a bad chill, West's arm had grown much worse, and
had been operated on in the morning by a doctor with a pair of scissors
_faute de mieux_--a most agonizing process. On the other hand, the
Berane route was unknown to the authorities, and might have fallen so
into decay that it was useless; we did not know where the Austro-Germans
were, and they might be already on the outskirts of Novi Bazar; if any
of us fell ill we should certainly be captured. It was a toss up.
Finally he asked the others. They said--

"What you think best. You know the country."

We finally decided to go to Novi Bazar and make inquiries. If there were
no road we could go thence to Mitrovitza, and would only have lost a
day. If, as the colonel said, the bridge was washed away, we could
probably ford the river.

Then to bed. One could not sleep really well, for the rugs did not give
sufficient warmth, and the chill striking up from the ground penetrated
everything.

Took the road to Novi Bazar next day. Miss Brindley joined us with a
parcel of blankets and a knapsack and a mackintosh lent by a friend. She
had lost her boots, or the local cobbler had lost them, but most
appropriately a motor had arrived and on it was a pair of new soldier's
boots unclaimed. She took them, cut the feet of a pair of indiarubber
Wellingtons and pulled them over her stockings, and put a smile on her
face which never came off in spite of any fatigue.

Hilder and Antonio went off with Sir Ralph's box. The "Stobarts" wished
us good luck, and away we clattered over the rickety bridge, up through
the town and out into the Novi Bazar road. The surface was fairly good,
and the day turned brilliant. We had left the six sisters and their
luggage behind with their respective units, and so had four extra
waggons to carry our stuff. We rattled along cheerily, only dismounting
at the occasional patches of mud which we met.

After a while we decided to lunch. We came to a café and halted.

"Have you coffee?" we asked.

"Ima."

"Will you give us all coffee?"

"We have no sugar," said the hostess; so we had no coffee.

We got out a tin of biscuits and lunched on those. As we were passing
them round a soldier stopped.

"What are you selling those for?" he asked, under the impression that we
were a travelling shop. We gave him some, to his great astonishment.

On we went again. Down below us in a field the corporal spotted a
hayrick. Like stage villains the coachmen clambered down the hill, each
with a rope--spoil from the discarded tents. They attacked the rick and
soon nothing was left. As they staggered back, each hidden beneath an
enormous load of hay--looking themselves like walking ricks--a Turk in
black and white clothes ran down from above furiously brandishing a
three-pronged fork.

"What are you doing?" he yelled.

The corporal stood stiffly and said--

"It is war. We are the State. It is of no value for you to preach."

The owner went dolefully down the hill, and stood looking at where his
stack had been.

"We have again prevented those Germans from stealing good hay," said the
corporal with satisfaction. Each cart looked not unlike a hay wain
returning from the fields, and we scrambled up on to the top feeling
like children in the autumn. After we had gone a mile we began to wonder
why we had given the owner no compensation: evidently the corporal's
influence was turning us into scoundrels.

At last the broken bridge. Only a shallow stream across which our carts
splashed joyfully. On the other side was a small church with a beautiful
blue tower. And soon we were in the outskirts of Novi Bazar, the most
ordinary town of the Sanjak, combining the dull parts of Plevlie with
the dull parts of Ipek. There was a stream down the middle of the road,
in which some of the inhabitants were washing, while one sat on his
haunches holding up a small looking-glass with one hand and shaving
himself.

We bustled off to the mayor's office. Found him as usual in a back
street in a shabby office up shaky wooden stairs. The mayor knew nothing
of any road to Berane; so baffled, we again found the street. We went
to the shabby Turkish shops of the bazaar and inquired.

"Certainly," said the shopkeepers, "a good path to Berane, and not high.
No; not so high as that by Ipek."

We returned to the mayor's office. He seemed little inclined to consent,
and demanded to see our pass. Jo again made her little--but so
useful--speech. The mayor called in an Albanian. After a long
consultation the mayor said that he had no horses.

"Then we will take our carriage horses," said we.

"There are no roads for carriages," said the mayor.

"Then we will take the horses without the carriages."

The mayor called in two more men: they considered the pass once more.

"You may have the carriages two days more," he decided at last. "Go to
Tutigne. As far as that the carriages will travel. There are many horses
there, and you can get pack ponies."

Coming out we ran into Colonel Stajitch of Valievo. The colonel is a
Serbian gentleman, fine figure, beautiful face, and white hair and
moustaches. He greeted us, asked us our news. We told him of our
projected journey. He became thoughtful and after a while said good-bye.
We took our convoy through the town to a field on the outskirts where
we pitched the camp.

We borrowed the corporal's axe and hewed for some time in a thorn hedge,
without getting much profit but many prickles, and finally decided to
take a paling from a Turkish cemetery, for there was no one about.

Soon we had a jolly fire, and Cutting and Whatmough got to work on the
food. Dr. Holmes turned up. He had arrived the day before and had found
lodgings in an inn. West's arm was still inflamed and very painful. The
doctor looked at it and said it needed more incision. West and Miss
Brindley went off with him.

An old ragamuffin wandered up with a loaf of maize bread. He offered it
to the corporal for three dinars; but the corporal took it away and gave
him two. The old man made a great outcry. We demanded the cause. The
unlawful corporal was again hailed to justice, his corporalship seeming
more valueless than ever, and to give him a lesson we bought the bread
for three dinars, for it was worth it.

We suddenly discovered that none of the Red Cross men had papers or
passes. What was to be done? We were conniving at an almost unlawful
expedition, and Jan was very doubtful if we could cross the Montenegrin
frontier. But after a consultation we decided to bluff it into
Montenegro if necessary, and then telegraph to Cettinje to help us out.

It was now dark and West and Miss Brindley had not come back. So Jan and
Jo went off to look for them. We searched two cafés--meeting again with
our old acquaintance the schoolmaster from Nish--plunged into all sorts
of odd corners, and at last met Colonel Stajitch in a restaurant. He
greeted us.

"I have a great favour to ask," he said diffidently. "If I might I
should like to give to you a little appendix. It is my son. He is
seventeen, but is very big for his age. If the Austrians catch him I do
not know what will become of him."

We were introduced to the boy, and at once consented.

"I will decide for certain to-morrow," said the colonel. "Can I meet you
at seven o'clock?"

We hunted once more for West. Ran him to earth at last in the Hotel de
Paris. This hotel could perhaps have existed in the Butte de Montmartre,
but even there it would have been considered a disgrace. We had to pass
through a long room crammed with sleeping soldiery, stepping across them
to get to the door opposite. Every window was tight shut, and after one
horrified gulp we held our breath till we reached the interior
courtyard. Here, too, were sleeping men, and all along the balconies and
passages were more.

We found Holmes' room. West was there, rather white and just recovering
from the anæsthetic. We sat down. Dr. Holmes had thought of coming with
us, but the authorities had looked suspiciously at his passes, which
were made out to Mitrovitza, so he decided to go on there. We wished
that he had come, as a doctor would have been a great comfort had we
really needed him.

After a rest West was well enough to go back to the camp.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XX

THE UNKNOWN ROAD


As we stood around the camp fire drinking our cocoa a queer ragged old
Albanian crept up and watched us with a smile. He was the owner of the
house near by, whose palings we had almost looted. We offered him cocoa,
which he liked immensely; and asked him about the road to Tutigne. He
said--

"There is a road for carts--I know it."

"Will you show it us?" said Jo.

He gave a wild yell and ran away, waving a stick.

"What ----?!!!! ----"

It was nothing, only the pigs had invaded his cabbage patch. He came
back later with an enormous apple, which he presented to Jo.

"Have you apples for sale?"

He shook his head, saying "Ima, ima."

We bought several pounds, arranged with him to guide us later to the
carriage road, and hurried into the town to buy provisions.

There we met Colonel Stajitch. "Will you take my boy?"

"Delighted. Are his papers in order?"

The mayor hereupon turned up, and the colonel's face grew longer as they
conversed.

"The mayor cannot give me the necessary permits without Government
sanction," he said. "I must get it from Rashka by telephone. It will
take an hour. Can you wait?"

We spent the time shopping. Each shop looked as empty as if it had been
through a Saturday night's sale. One had elderly raisins, another had a
few potatoes. We found some onions, bought another cooking pot and
kitchen necessaries, and packed them in the carts which had arrived in
the town. Nobody would take paper money unless we bought ten francs'
worth. After waiting an hour and a half we hunted down the colonel. The
telephone official told us he had got leave from the Government. At last
we found him in the mayor's office, bristling with papers and the
passport.

"I have got you an armed policeman as escort," he said, waving the
papers, "and the boy has a good horse, twenty pounds in gold, and twenty
in silver."

We found the boy waiting with the carriages. He wore a strange little
brown cashmere Norfolk jersey and very superior black riding breeches.
Dressed more romantically he would have made an ideal Prince for an
Arabian Nights' story. His father accompanied us until our Albanian
guide announced--

"Here begins the carriage road."

Their parting must have been a hard thing. The father could not tell how
his son's expedition would end, and the son was leaving his father to an
unknown fate. They embraced, smiling cheerily, and the boy rode on ahead
of us all, blowing his nose and cursing his horse.

In many places the "carriage road" was no road at all. The carts lurched
and bumped over rivers, boulders, fields, and the inevitable mud.
Several times we had to jump on our carts as they dragged us over deep
and rapid rivers. After three hours we stopped at a farm, our mounted
policeman called out the owners and autocratically ordered two of the
young men to accompany us as guides and guards.

They came, bearing their guns, white fezzed, white clothed, black
braided youths with shaven polls and flashing teeth. We began to climb,
and for hours and hours we toiled upwards. The carriages lumbered
painfully far behind us, led by their elderly and panting drivers.

"If this is what they call a good and easy road," we thought, "it would
have been better to harness four horses to each cart, and to have left
five carts behind."

The horses came from the plain of Chabatz, and had probably never seen a
hill in their lives.

"These horses will die," said the corporal; but he seemed more
interested in hunting for water for himself than in the struggles of the
poor beasts.

One of our Albanian guides was overwhelmed with the beauty of Cutting's
silver-plated revolver.

"How much did you pay for it?"

"Thirty francs," said Cutting, shooting at the scenery.

Jan produced his automatic, but the Albanian scorned it as one would
turn from a lark to a bird of Paradise. He turned the glittering object
over lovingly, thought, felt in his pockets, drew out a green and red
knitted purse, and shook his head.

"I will give you thirty francs."

But Cutting wasn't on the bargain. He pocketed the treasure again, and
we plodded on.

"How far are we from Tutigne?" we asked.

"Four hours," said a dignified Albanian, who had joined our party.

"No, two hours," said another.

"Three at most," corrected a third.

The first man lifted his hand. "I say four hours, and it is four hours.
With such horses as these we crawl."

We reached a desolate tableland at dusk. Here the horses halted for some
while. With the halt came a sudden desire to stay there for good. It
seemed as if we should never reach Tutigne. The evening brought with it
chilly damp breezes, and the footsore company was getting quite
disheartened.

"Let us camp here," said everybody.

But the policeman had a mailbag to deliver that night, and we had to
push on. Experienced as we were in Serbian roads, never had we seen such
mud. Down, down sank our feet, and we could only extract them again
clinging to the carts with the sound of a violent kiss. We tried to
escape it by climbing into the thick brushwood, only to find it again,
stickier and more slippery, while the bushes grasped us with thorny arms
and athletically switched our faces. A moonless darkness came upon us
and we had to walk just behind the carriages, peering at the square yard
of road illuminated by candles in our penny lanterns.

Occasionally a voice greeted us. We asked how far Tutigne was.

"About an hour," was the invariable answer all along the line.

But the dignified guide was right. After four hours we reached the main
street, arriving slowly to the music of incredible clatter as our little
carts leapt and jolted over hundreds of big pointed stones laid
carefully side by side--Tutigne's concession to Macadam.

There were faint lights in some of the little wooden houses. Others
stood dark and unfriendly. We stopped. Curses filled the air. An ox-cart
was lying right across the road. After shouting himself hoarse the
policeman woke up an old man in a house near by--the owner. He
rheumatically grumbled in his doorway; so the gendarme called our
Albanians, and in two twos they had turned the cart upside down in a
ditch, saying--

"It serves you right."

Voices sounded in the darkness. The carriages lurched on. Presently they
left the road and turned on to grass, they seemed to be leaving the
village behind. We did not know where they were going, and were so tired
that we did not care, if only they would get somewhere and stop, which
at last they did. We jumped off into a squelch of water.

"Good heavens, this won't do!"

We searched the whole field for a dry spot, but though it was a
hillside, it was a swamp. We chose the least marshy place and built a
fire.

"Where is the mayor?" we asked of the strange faces dimly to be seen in
the light of our fire.

They pointed to two cottage window lights. We went towards them, at
last realizing our proximity by stumbling into a dung-heap and knocking
against a pig-stye. There was a narrow stairway, and above it a big
landing. A man followed and knocked at a door for us.

The mayor appeared--a little man--square in face, hair, beard and
figure.

We explained ourselves and showed our letter. He looked grave at our
demand for horses; said we would talk it over on the morrow, and
sympathized about the swampy field.

"Would you like to sleep here on the floor?" he said, showing us a
clean-looking office. "We regret we have no beds."

We were delighted. His wife, who had gone to bed, appeared in a striped
petticoat and a second one worn as a shawl.

"The tables shall be moved and the stove lit," she said. "It will be
ready in a few minutes."

We picked our way back to the fire, avoiding the dung-heap and pig-stye,
whereby we nearly fell into a cesspool. Cocoa was brewing, one
card-house had been erected as a shelter for some of our things. The
drivers were crouched round their own fire cooking something. It was
difficult to find our bundles in the carts as one only recognized them
by the drivers. We climbed in feeling about by the light of a match. Jo
found a foot in one.

"How can we find things with people lying on them?" she said to the
foot.

It remained immobile; she pulled it--no response. She tugged it. A face
lifted itself at the far end of the cart. It was the corporal's wife
lying on her own possessions, very tired and rather cross. Jo patted her
remorsefully and decamped.

We must have looked like a regiment of gnomes bearing forbidden treasure
as we hobbled through the darkness, laden with our bundles of blankets.
The light in the office nearly blinded us, and the heat from the stove
struck us like a violent blow. The mayor, his wife, two hurriedly
dressed children and several other people received us. There was an
awkward silence. Jo murmured in the background--

"It is manners here to go up, shake hands, and say one's name."

Very uncomfortably everybody did so, one by one. Another silence. We
racked our brains--the weather--our journey--the war. One had nothing
sensible to say about anything. Jo asked the children's age. The
information was supplied. Silence. We filled the gap by smiling. At last
the mayor's wife said we must be worn out, and they all left us.

The mayor crept back. "Don't talk about the military situation," he
said; "if these Turks knew it they might kill us all." Then he shut the
door.

We flew to a window and opened it, changed our stockings, hung wet boots
and socks over the stove, ate bully beef, and rolled up, pillowing our
heads on our little sacks--thirteen sleepy people.

The mayor's wife opened the door an inch and peeped at us as we lay,
looking, indeed, more like a jumble sale than anything. Mawson wore a
Burglar cap tied under his chin, and a collection of khaki mufflers,
looking equipped for a Channel crossing. Miss Brindley's head was tied
up in a bandana handkerchief; Jo's in a purple oilsilk hood; others
shared mackintosh sheets and blankets; West pulled his Serbian cap right
down to his mouth. Jan put on the white mackintosh dressing-coat, over
that his greatcoat, then he spread out a red, green, yellow and black
striped Serbian rug, rolled up in it with many contortions, and pushed
his feet into a tent bag. Blease in a Balaklava, showing nose like an
Arctic explorer, got into a black oilskin, one corner of which had been
repaired with a large yellow patch, he then rolled up in oddments
collected from the company, as his own overcoat had been stolen, and
bound it all together by tying the many coloured knitted rug around him,
after putting the lamp out inadvertently with his head.

In the morning we interviewed the mayor. He read and reread the letter
from the Novi Bazar mayor, took an interest in the social supremacy of
Stajitch's father, who was a man of birth, but said he had no horses.

Jo appealed to his better feelings. He scratched his head.

"Yes, truly one must try to help the English," he said, but looked very
glum.

"I will have the neighbouring hamlets searched for horses."

We thanked him and wandered into the village café. An old man with black
sprouting eye-brows à la Nick Winter, was sitting there. He had walked
for five days, eating only apples.

"Very good food too," he said. "Here is my luggage."

He pointed to a knotted handkerchief containing a tiny loaf of bread
which he had just acquired. His goal was a monastery in Montenegro,
where he said they would house and feed him for the winter in exchange
for a little work.

At 11.30 three horses were brought. Three more were promised, so we
reluctantly decided to start the next day. There was nothing to do.

Our carriages went. We gave the corporal a card-house to take back to
Rashka with little faith that he would not try to stick to it. He had
not returned the boots to their owner, so we took them from him and
gave them to their rightful owner, and handed over to the corporal a
spare pair of our own boots to keep him honest.

At dawn Stajitch, who had been sleeping in style upon a friend's table,
came to say we had six horses, but a professor had turned up in the
night and was coming with us. He had been so exhausted with the walk
that his policeman had carried him most of the way. Not pleased, we went
to inspect him. He was small, corpulent, and was sitting with clasped
woolly gloves, goloshed feet, and a diffident smile.

He explained to us that he was delicate, and as he was no walker it
would be necessary for him to ride one horse. So we packed our food,
sacks, blankets, mackintoshes and the card-house as best we could on the
remaining five horses.

No sooner had we left the village, and all signs of road or bridle path,
with a new policeman and two or three ragged Albanians, than one of the
horses broke loose and began to dance--first the tango, then the waltz.
The pack, which was but insecurely attached, stood the tango, but with
the waltz a bag of potatoes swung loose at the end of a rope, its
gyroscopic action swinging the horse quicker and quicker until it was
spinning on one toe. Then the girths broke, saddle and all came to the
ground. The brute looked round as if saying "That's that," and cantered
off, followed slowly by the professor on horseback. We called. He
appeared to take no notice. At last he turned round saying--

"The horse will not."

Jo leapt in the air kicking.

"Do that with your heels," she said.

But we had to send the policeman to help him. He rode hour by hour,
hitting his beast with a bent umbrella, and lifting two fat hands to
heaven.

"Teshko" (It is hard), he whined.

"_Ni_ je teshko" (It is not hard), said Miss Brindley, cheerfully
trudging along.

We wanted to stop at the top of a hill for lunch.

"Horrible," he said. "Here the brigands will shoot us from the bushes,"
and pushed ahead, being held on by the grinning policeman.

We pulled out some biscuits and margarine, and drank water from our
bottles, cigarettes went round, and we charged ahead. In front was the
professor falling off his horse and being put on again.

We were very anxious about the frontier. Most of our party were
travelling without official permits, as they had known nothing about
such things; but we hoped that being English Red Cross and having
passports there would not be much trouble. We arrived at a little
village, three or four wooden houses. Three pompous old men came to meet
us, and we took coffee together outside the inn. They were very
surprised to hear we were English, and said that no English had ever
passed that way before.

At the frontier, an hour further on, a man and his wife came down from a
little house on the hill and stopped us. They examined the papers of the
two Serbs, but left us alone, to our huge relief. We breathed again.

Soon after, however, Whatmough rushed up to Jan and Jo, who were talking
to a ragged woman.

"Do come and talk. An officer has arrested West and Mawson."

We ran ahead to find a perplexed mounted officer surrounded by our
party. He had come upon West and Mawson walking on ahead and took them
to be Bulgarian comitaj.

"No, that's not an English uniform," he said, and searched them for
firearms. When the others came he wavered. Miss Brindley did not look
like a comitaj; and by the time we arrived he began to talk about the
military situation in the Balkans, and rode off with the politest of
farewells.

If there isn't a telegraph wire to guide, don't take short cuts. Jan,
Stajitch, and Jo tried to race the darkness by cutting straight down a
ravine. We lost the horses, lost every one else, and we came out again
on to a hill crest. No one was to be seen. After a while the professor
rode by, led by his policeman, who had been almost suffocated by
laughter all day.

"Teshko, teshko," moaned the professor.

"Ni je teshko," we said. "But where are the horses?"

He waved a hand vaguely behind him. Rogerson, Whatmough, and Owen came
up. It was getting dark and a mist was rising. So we left the three at
the corner to mark where it was and went back. For a long time we
stumbled in the darkness, shouting, but no horses could we find. At last
we decided to turn back, wondering if they too had lost their way and
decided to camp out. There were shouts in the valley beyond. A light
flashed and some one fired off a revolver. There was a candle end in
Jan's bag, and by its dim light we found a road. It went downwards, so
we thought it might be the right one. Suddenly it turned in the wrong
direction, but as there were hoof marks on it we decided to follow it as
it must lead somewhere--we could not search the whole countryside with a
candle. Just as we were in despair the road seemed to shake itself and
twisted back again. We heard more shouting and saw a light, and at last
found Miss Brindley and Mawson, who were waiting for us.

"We have been to the village," they said.

We asked them about the horses. They said they were all there!!!!

That professor again!

Some one heard trickling water, and with a cry of joy we put our mouths
under the jet of water which spouted from a little trough which jutted
from the hill. Nothing could be seen of the village when we arrived, but
it seemed very long and very stony. An old peasant with a candle led us
for what seemed miles between high palisades of wood until we reached
the inn.

There was a big room with a stove in the middle and many Montenegrins in
uniform were sitting about. Some of our party were already asleep, worn
out on the benches. We opened a tin of beef, got some bread and kaimack
and woke up the others for their evening meal. While we were eating a
Montenegrin staff officer said--

"Your commandant, the professor--"

"What?" said we.

"Your commandant, the professor, has said you will rest here to-morrow."

We told him the professor was no commandant of ours, and that we
certainly would not rest there to-morrow.

"Well," said the staff officer, "he has certainly ordered horses for the
day after from the captain."

We were too tired to rectify matters at once, and our meal finished, we
rolled up on the dirty floor.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXI

THE FLEA-PIT


Those comfortable folks who have never slept out of a bed do not know
how annoying a blanket may be, if there is nothing into which to tuck
its folds. Wrap yourself up in one, lie flat and motionless on the
floor, and we guarantee that in an hour the blanket has unrolled itself
and is making frantic efforts to escape. Every night on the road
resolved into a half-dazed attempt to hold on to the elusive wrap. Sleep
came in as a second consideration, and when we say we awoke on any
particular morning, it really means that we got up, though several of us
in the intervals of blanket catching did get in a snore or two.

Well, we got up, then, in good time next day, hoping to rectify the
professor's interference, and stumbling along with Stajitch, we reached
the high-roofed "Dürer" dwelling where resided the commandant of the
village. In the kitchen we found two women with bare feet, two children
and a man half undressed. He brought in the captain, also in negligée.
Now, mark, we were in Montenegro. We exposed our grievance to the
captain and roundly denounced the professor as an interfering old
beggar. The captain first gave us coffee, second hurried us to his
office, third called in three henchmen and issued rapid orders.

"Certainly, certainly. You shall have all the horses you need. Just only
wait one little quarter of an hour. I will give you four policemen to go
with you."

We protested that four was too many.

"No, no," he said, "you had better have four."

We went back joyfully to the hotel. Cutting or one of the others had
been exploring and had gotten twenty eggs. The hotel people consented to
cook them. While we were outside looking at the mosques and wondering
when the horses were coming, the professor walked into the bar-room.

"Ah," said he, "eggs."

"They belong to the English," said the hostess.

"Good," said the professor, and swallowed four.

Just then we returned.

"But there are only sixteen eggs," said we.

"The professor has eaten the others," said the woman, pointing.

In a minute the professor wished that he had not. Jan took the
opportunity of saying a few things which had been boiling within him. He
accused the wretched man of interference in assuming control of the
expedition; he said that he was a mere hanger-on, and a useless and
selfish one at that.

The professor wilted. He made a thousand apologies, and finally ran off
wringing his fat hands, found with great difficulty four more eggs and
cast them into the boiling water.

"There," he said, "you can have your four eggs."

"It's not the eggs," answered Jan, "it's you."

Jo was roaring with laughter. Some of the morning she had been in a
woman's house listening to one of the policeman's tales of the
professor, and soon the whole village was rocking with amusement at
"Teshko."

At last the horses arrived--six miserable-looking beasts, but this time
all had shoes. One was commandeered by the professor.

"He is the greatest philosopher in all Serbia," whispered an official to
Jan.

"Ah, I guessed there must be some reason," said Jan.

We had a send-off, all the village came to see us go away. The day was
a repetition of our previous experiences. A long tramp in the mud. At
the top of the highest pass we had yet reached was an old wooden
blockhouse.

We came upon it unexpectedly, rounding a corner. Montenegrin soldiers
were cooking at a wood fire; but we were surprised to find all round the
square log cabin deep rifle pits, the best we had yet seen in Serbia.

"Good Lord, what are those for?" said Jan.

"This is an old Turkish post," said the sergeant. "It has been kept up.
We don't know why."

We walked off meditating. Montenegrins do not squander soldiers without
reason; and then one's mind went back to the four armed guards who were
accompanying us.

We discovered the truth later, let us tell the story here.

Berane, to which we were descending, was once a populous growing Turkish
town. After the Balkan war it fell into Montenegrin territories. The
Montenegrins chased out all the Turkish landowners, who fled to these
mountains, where they formed bands of brigands and caused no little
consternation and trouble to the authorities, who could not catch them.
The authorities passed a little Act, reinstating the landowners in
their territories; but when an attempt was made to put the Act into
force, it was found that the authorities themselves were in possession
of the lands. What was to be done? The blockhouse was the solution.

We stopped at a primitive café and lunched. Jo gave the children some
chocolate. They did not know what it was. She smeared some on to the
baby's lips, and after that it sucked hard. Soon the little girl licked
hers; but the boy, more suspicious, would not eat, holding the lump till
it melted into a sticky mass in his fingers. The scenery was very
beautiful. There was a faint rain which greyed everything, and the near
birches had lost all their leaves and the twigs made a reddish fog
through which could be seen the slopes of the opposite hillsides. The
professor began to be worried about the rain.

"If this should turn to snow," said he, "we would be snowed up. And I am
sure I don't know what I should do if I were snowed up."

We hoped to reach our halting place, which was called Vrbitza, before
dark; but it was further away than our informant had said. Once more we
found ourselves floundering about in the mud of the village path after
dusk. We reached houses which we could not see; walked over slippery
poles set over heaven knows what middens. Clambered up creaky steps
into the usual sort of dirty wooden room--and there, his stockings off,
warming his toes at the blaze of the wood fire, was "Eyebrows."

We were immediately attracted by three paintings on the wall. They were
decorative designs, very beautiful. We asked the proprietor who had done
them.

"I did," he said.

"Will you sell them?" we asked.

He giggled like a girl. "Ah, who would buy them?" he said.

"We will."

"I couldn't let you have them for less than sixpence," he said. "You see
the papers cost a penny each."

Whatmough coveted one, so he had his choice, we took the other two.

The policeman came to tell us that rooms had been prepared in two clean
houses. We scrambled out into the dark again, stumbled along in the mud,
and at last found an open square of light, through which we came into a
room.

There was a red rug over half the floor, and a brasier on three legs
filled with charcoal standing in the centre. One or two of our men had
already found the place and were lying on the rug. In one corner was a
large baking oven like a beehive, half in one and half in the room next
door. A wide shelf ran from the beehive almost to the open door. There
were two small windows, each about the size of this book wide open. Jan
and Jo sniffed. Where had they smelt that odour before?

An old woman in Albanian costume crept up to Jo and caught her by the
skirt.

"See," she said, dragging her into the next room, "here is a fine bed.
The ladies will sleep with me this night."

Jo looked at the old lady's greasy hair and filthy raiment.

"We always sleep with our own people," she said firmly.

The old lady protested. All the while our men were packing the baggage
beneath the shelf. It was a tight fit, but at last it was got in.

The professor entered once more on the scene.

"This house will do very well for the common people," he said, "but the
Herr Commandant" (meaning Jan) "and the two ladies will come over to
sleep with me."

"No, we won't," said Jan, Jo and Miss Brindley in one voice.

"Then what will you do?"

"We will give you two policemen, or all four if you like. We will pack
in here somehow. You can take the other house all to yourself."

"That will not do," said the professor. "If you are all determined to
sleep here, I too, will come here. You will need somebody to protect
you."

Jo's back went up.

"If you are afraid to sleep in the other house," she said, "you can
sleep here with us. But if you are coming here to protect us, we don't
require _you_."

"But you do not understand," said the professor kindly, as if to a
child: "there is danger. You will need me to protect you."

"Not in the least," answered Jo. "If you will say that you are afraid,
we will offer you our shelter. Otherwise you can have all four policemen
at the other house."

The professor was afraid to say that he was afraid, so after stating
that we were curious people, he went off with the guards.

With great difficulty we packed in. Cutting and Whatmough were forced to
climb on to the shelf and the brazier was pushed out of the room. One by
one we rolled up in our rugs, made pillows out of a pair of boots or a
cocoa tin, cursed each other for taking up so much space, and at last
all were jammed together like sardines. It was like the family in the
drawing: If father says turn, we all turn.

We did not rest well. Thirteen people in a room which would comfortably
hold three was a little too close packing. There was a lot of grumbling
coming from one corner, and after a while a light was struck.

"Good lord," said somebody, "my pillow's crawling!"

Bugs were cascading down the walls. Stajitch jumped to his feet, and
began stamping hard. "Rivers of them," he yelled.

Cutting and Whatmough were groaning about the heat, so we opened the
door. Immediately all the dogs of the village, half wolves, hurled
themselves at the lighted space. Stajitch slammed it just in time; had
they burst in, lying down as we were, we should have been unable to
protect ourselves.

A dark face peered in between the baking oven and the wall, a swarthy
Albanian face. It looked at us and then silently withdrew.

"It doesn't matter," said somebody at last, "we've got to stick it."

We roused up neither rested nor refreshed. The room seen in the dim
light of the morning seemed even more revolting than it had been the
night before. We demanded the bill, it was brought--five francs for
apples which we had bought. And for the room? Nothing. We gave our host
three francs extra, and he bowed, putting his hands to his bosom and
kissed our palms.

There was a good stiff clay soil waiting for our tiring feet, and by the
time we reached Berane, there was no thought of going further. Almost
every one was exhausted.

We reached the shores of the river. The bridge had been washed away, but
the inhabitants had made a boat like a sort of huge wooden shoe which
they dragged to and fro with ropes. We clambered in and were hauled
over. Our baggage had not yet arrived, so Jan and Stajitch ordered lunch
for the others and went down to see about it. Just as they were landed
on the opposite bank the rope broke. So all the Montenegrins and
Albanians who were working the ferry went off to a midday meal, leaving
the two with the pangs of hunger growling within, sitting on the bank.

After two hours' waiting the rope was repaired, and they got back to
lunch famishing. We then arranged sleeping places and locked up all the
baggage in an empty shop. Our room was one of those ordinary Montenegrin
bedrooms plastered with pictures. Amongst them was a postcard, and on it
was printed large in English in blue crystalline letters, "Never
Again."

Whence did it come, this enigmatic postcard, and what did it mean? It
seemed almost a solemn warning; yet in a hotel bedroom. What did the
hostess think it meant?

"Never Again."

Some of the men came in cheering, having found Turkish delight in one of
the shops. We were sadly needing sugar, as our last tin had been stolen
along with lots of other things. So we indulged in "Turkish" not wisely.

The professor got up to his old games again. Again he had told the
commandant that he was leading the British, and that we would rest the
next day, and again Jan had to pick him off his perch.

Some got a bed that night, the others had to sleep "in rows," half under
the beds and half projecting out. The people on the beds said it was a
funny sight.

When we unpacked at night we found who had been robbing us. The
policemen. We had missed many more things, but found that the amount
varied in direct ratio to the number of police who guarded us. All our
spare boots were now gone, Blease's overcoat, and also Miss Brindley's.
Jo had lost her only other coat and skirt, and one or two mackintoshes
were missing. Now we knew why the police wore long-skirted coats; but
what a disappointment the one must have had who lifted Jo's coat and
skirt.

Got off again in good time the next morning. Cutting and three others
stayed behind to look after the police. Lucky they did, because one of
the horses wore out, and the police would have left it on the road, pack
and all. As it was we left the horse grazing, but the baggage was
transferred.

There had been a decentish level road made from Andrievitza half way to
Berane, and women were working hard on the extension in the hopes of
getting it finished for the Serbs; but that they could never do, for
there were but few of them. Further on many of the bridges were
unfinished, and in one or two places a landslide had carried away the
road itself, leaving a deep clinging mud in its place, but we were
getting used to mud.

We met "Eyebrows" once more, just at the entrance to the village; but he
was going on to Pod, so had finally got a day ahead of us. Found rooms
in our old resting place.

The professor was threatening to accompany us to Italy--he was like the
old man of the sea. We got a telegram from the English Minister, saying
that he did not think we could ever get to Italy from Scutari. We
preferred to trust to our luck which so far had been wonderful,
especially in the matter of weather. In the evening the captain sent to
say that twenty horses would await us the next day. A motor car would
have been sent, he added, but almost all the bridges were washed away
and they could get no nearer than Liéva Riéka.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXII

ANDRIEVITZA TO POD


A problem met us in the morning. Willett was quite ill and only fit for
bed. But bed was impossible. We had just escaped from the sound of the
guns, and did not know which way the Austrians were coming. To wait was
too risky; others would certainly get seedy and sooner or later some one
might get seriously ill. We felt we must push on to Podgoritza and be
within hail of doctor and chemist. But Willett looked very wretched,
lying flat and refusing breakfast.

We plied him with chlorodyne; but the chlorodyne did not like him and
they parted company. We tried chlorodyne followed by brandy with better
effect. Others also showed a distinct interest in the chlorodyne bottle.
We felt very anxious: milk was almost unprocurable, other comforts nil.

We finally decided that if he was going to have dysentery he had better
have it decently and in order at Podgoritza, than stand the chance of
being suddenly surprised by the Austrians and made to walk endless
distances. So we heaved him on to a wooden pack, and the other
chlorodyney figures of woe climbed on to the remaining queer-looking
saddles.

Blease tried a horse which had a thoughtful eye. It kicked him on the
knee, and trod on his toe, so he relinquished the joy of riding for the
serener pleasure of walking. Jan clambered on to it, whereupon it stood
on its forelegs, and as there were no stirrups and the saddle back hit
him behind, he landed over its neck, remaining there propped up by a
stick which was in his hand. After readjusting himself inside the two
wooden peaks of the saddle, he testified his disapproval to the beast,
and trotted away in style, leaving a row of grinning Montenegrins and
boys behind with the exception of one who clung to reins and other bits
of saddlery, imploring him to stop. It would seem as if pack ponies were
never meant to trot, but at last he shook off the pony boy, passed Miss
Brindley (whose horse was looking at himself in a puddle with such deep
and concentrated interest that he pulled her over his head and landed
her in the middle of the water), and reached the vanguard of the party,
who had deserted their horses for a lift on a lorry--Willett, sitting in
front with the driver, was shrunk like a concertina inside his great
coat.

The lorry dropped us just before the first broken bridge. Then we had to
leave the road and face mud slush, climbing for hours. We had picked up
various friends--a courtly old peasant who was very worried to hear that
Kragujevatz had fallen, and feared for the invasion of Montenegro; two
barefoot girls, who asked Jo all the usual questions, and an
American-speaking Serbian man who had trudged from Ipek, the first
refugee on that road from Serbia. He was very mysterious, and contrary
to the usual custom, would not tell us about himself nor where he was
going.

He was very anxious to stand us drinks, but curiously enough, every one
refused. The professor had started before us, with a Greek priest. When
we passed him he lifted his hands deprecatingly, "Teshko."

Our hopes of arriving before dark were as usual crushed. The dusk found
us still floundering in the mud on wayside paths. It began to pour. The
hills above us became white--a straight line being drawn between snow
and rain--and our guides wanted us to spend the night at an inn two
hours before we reached Jabooka. But it looked very uninviting--we
remembered the cheery hostess of Jabooka, the woman who came from "other
parts," and knew a thing or two about cleanliness. Every one agreed to
go on. Willett was rather better, so we forged ahead in the downpour
and the dark, splashing through puddles and singing everything we knew.
Our Albanian guides chuckled and chanted their own nasal songs in a
different key as an accompaniment.

Far away we saw a tiny light--Jabooka. We stretched our legs and hurried
along, but alas! the inn room was full. There was the professor, his
face shining from warmth and well-being, crowds of men in uniform, some
fat travelling civilians: faces looked up from the floor, from the
corners, faces were everywhere, wet boys were steaming in front of the
fire, while the hostess and a girl were picking their way as best they
could in the tobacco smoke with eggs and rakia.

Full; even the floor! and we were wet through. The professor had
announced that we were staying at the dirty inn away back. Oh, the old
villain!

He came forward, saying in an impressive voice that a major had taken
the inn.

"Bother the major," said Jo. "Something must be done."

The professor smiled. "There _is_ another inn."

There was nothing for it. We had to go to the inn across the road, glad
enough to have a roof at all. The rain was tearing down as if the
heavens were filled with fire-engines.

But they didn't want us there. We beheld a dirty low-ceiled room filled
with filthy people and a smell of wet unwashed clothes.

The owner and his wife received us roughly. "We have no room, we have
nothing," they said.

We stood our ground. "We _must_ have a roof to-night."

Outside the road had become a river, our men were nearly dropping with
fatigue.

"You can't come here," said the innkeeper, looking at us with great
distrust.

The major, whom Jo had "bothered," came in. "You must take these
people," he said, and asked various searching questions about the rooms.

Reluctantly the truth came out that if the whole family slept in one
room there would be one for us. The major ordered them to do it. Jo
wished she hadn't "bothered" him quite so gruffly.

The daughters stamped about, furiously pulling all the blankets off the
two beds, while one of them stood in the doorway watching us to see that
we did not secrete the greasy counterpanes. Several of the party sat,
hair on end, with staring eyes, too tired to shut them.

"Food?"

"Nema Nishta," was the response.

"Can we boil water?"

"No."

"Where can we boil it?"

"Nowhere."

"But there is a fire in the kitchen," we said, pointing to a hooded
fireplace where a few sticks were burning.

"Why shouldn't they boil water?" said a kindly looking man.

"Well, I suppose they can," said the old woman, who became almost
pleasant over the kitchen fire--telling Jo she was sixty and only a
stara Baba (old granny).

Miss Brindley made tea. We cheered as she brought it in. Tea, bully
beef, and our last biscuits comprised our dinner, which we ate in big
gulps, after which we sang "Three blind mice" as a digestive.

The half-open door was full of peering faces, so somewhat encouraged we
gave them a selection of rounds.

We left next morning early in a heavy downpour, after being exorbitantly
charged, glad to leave Jabooka for ever.

The professor was before us, an aged red Riding Hood, clad in his
scarlet blanket. The day was long and uneventful. Trudge, trudge,
splash, splash. The dividing line between snow and rain still was
heavily marked, but it sleeted and our hands were quite numbed. We
crossed an angry stream on a greasy pole and most of us splashed in.
Whatmough stood in the water, remarking, "I'm wet and I'll get no
wetter," and helped people across. Again after dark we arrived at Liéva
Riéka, to find our dirty old inn again; but it had a real iron stove
which gave out a glorious heat, and we crowded around in the ill-lit
room, clouds of steam arising from us. We tried to dry our stockings
against the stove pipe, but the old mother did not approve. She was
afraid of fire. When she ran out of the room, socks were pressed
surreptitiously against the pipe with a "sizz," and when she returned,
innocent looking people were standing against the wall, no socks to be
seen.

The eldest daughter settled down with her head in Jo's hip, having
failed to get Miss Brindley alongside. She gazed longingly at Miss
Brindley from Jo's lap, and asking for all the data possible as to her
life.

"A devoika (girl), free, travelling from a country so far away that it
would take three months in an oxcart to get there."

"Oh, how wonderful!"

They gave us a tiny room and two benches--much too small for the whole
company; so some slept outside on the balcony.

The professor was in the adjoining inn, so we guessed it must be the
best; but a young French sailor, from the wireless in Podgoritza, who
came to gossip with us, said there was nothing to choose.

He was champing, as the Government were commandeering the wireless
company's motor cars right and left using them to cart benzine; and now
they were going to send a refugee Serb officer's family to Podgoritza in
his motor, leaving him sitting.

We spent the next morning waiting for the motor, not knowing if it would
arrive or no. The professor sailed away in the French one, being one up
on us again. It still rained, so we sat contemplating the possibilities
of lunch. No sooner was it on the boil than the biggest automobile in
Montenegro, a covered lorry, turned up.

We persuaded the driver to lunch with us, and packed ourselves and our
dingy packages on to the wet floor. The motor buzzed up and downhill,
incessantly twisting and turning: what we could see of the view from the
back waved to and fro like Alpine scenery seen in the cinematograph.
Stajitch became violently seasick with the fumes of benzine, which arose
from two big tanks we were taking along, and lay with his head lolling
miserably out of the back of the car.

Pod once more, sleepy, inhospitable Pod.

We bargained for rooms at our old inn--mixed beds and floors. The owner
was asking more than ever; he shrugged his shoulders and raised his
hands.

"The war--increasing prices."

So we took what we could, put Stajitch to bed, saw the prefect, our old
friend from Chainitza, who promised us a carriage for Cettinje in the
morning.

Miss Brindley, joyfully ready to see Cettinje and anything else that
might turn up, joined Jo and Jan in the old shandrydan carriage which
lumbered along for seven hours to Cettinje.

"We are going to find Turkish delight," said the others, as they
disappeared down a side street, revelling in the idea of a rest.

Cettinje was inches deep in water. We assured the Count de Salis that
much as we needed money to continue the journey, we needed baths more.

This was a weighty matter and needed much thinking out, petroleum being
very scarce. The huge empty Legation kitchen stove was lit and upon it
were placed all the kettles, saucepans, and empty tins in the place; the
picturesque old baggy-breeched porter, his wife, and little boy stoking
hard, and asking lots of questions. One by one we were ushered into a
room, not the bathroom but a room containing the sort of comfortable
bath which makes the least water go the longest way, and also a
beautiful hot stove. This solemn rite occupied a whole afternoon. We
had not taken our clothes off for sixteen days and had been in the
dirtiest of places. A change of underclothing was effected. None too
soon! for at Liéva Riéka we had picked up lice.

We compared notes on this part afterwards. "Happy hunting?" we inquired
like Mowgli's friends. It was good to sit by the big kitchen stove
holding bits of dripping clothing to the blaze; the downfall at Cettinje
the evening before having completely drenched our damp things again.

Next day outside the world was white and silent, the snow covering the
little city and its intrigues with a thick whitewash.

The minister was the kindest of hosts and could not do enough for us
during our stay. Cettinje had not changed much. The hotel-keeper showed
an intense and violent anxiety to leave Montenegro. Never had his native
Switzerland seemed so alluring and never was it so unattainable. The
chemist, who owned a little one-windowed shop, was engaged to the king's
niece, quite a lift in the world for her, as she was marrying a man of
education.

Penwiper, the dog, was still in sole possession of the street, and again
went mad with joy at the sound of English women's voices, and
accompanied us everywhere, generally upside-down in the snow, clutching
our skirts with her teeth.

Jan was in and out of the Transport Office door while Miss Brindley and
Jo were being followed around the streets by a jeering crowd of
children, who seemed to think that Miss Brindley's india-rubber boot-top
leggings and Jo's corrugated stockings and safety-pinned-up skirt out of
place. We bought some bags from a woman we afterwards heard was
suspected of being an Austrian spy.

Poor old Prenk Bib Doda was in our hotel. He was Prince of the
Miridites. As a boy he had been kidnapped by the Turks and haled off to
Constantinople. Grown to a middle-aged man in captivity, he was restored
to his tribes during the Young Turk Revolution, only to be abducted by
the Montenegrins, and to be kept practically a prisoner in Cettinje. We
don't know if he disliked it, possibly not, for his walk in life seems
to be that of a professional hostage, if one may say so. His ideals of
comfort were certainly nearer to the cabarets in Berlin, than to the
wild orgies of his own subjects. In fact he was civilized.

A passage across the Adriatic seemed problematic. The Transport Minister
hoped we might catch a ship that had tried to leave Scutari three times,
but had always been thrown on the beach by storms. The great difficulty
was crossing the lake of Scutari. One steamer had been mysteriously sunk
and another damaged. He promised to arrange a motor for us directly he
should be able to put his hand on a boat to take us across the lake.

Jan and Jo simultaneously began to wish they had not eaten sardines at
Riéka. The attack was very violent, and next day Jo stayed in bed,
refusing the page boy's efforts to tempt her with lunch.

"See," he said, bearing in a third dish, "English, your i _rissh_kew."

Jo pretended to be pleased, and made Jan eat the Irish stew after his
lunch, so that the page boy's feelings should not be hurt.

Suddenly word came from the Transport Minister that a carriage was
coming for us. We were to go to Pod, and pick up the others. So Jo
stopped tying herself into knots and had to get up and go. We arrived at
Pod to find everybody ill. Two days' sedentary life and Turkish delight
were responsible for this. We suggested castor oil. One had just missed
pleurisy--Whatmough had acted as nurse.

The professor had been trying to pump Stajitch as to our future plans,
as he was again alone and rudderless. Stajitch said--

"Mr. and Mrs. Gordon alone know, and they are in Cettinje."

"Now that's not kind to keep a fellow countryman in the dark," said the
professor.

Stajitch assured him he knew nothing; but the professor walked away,
murmuring that the English were undermining a good Serb boy's character.

And that was the last of the professor.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXIII

INTO ALBANIA


We caught the mayor in the morning. He was in his shirt-sleeves and he
said that the auto had been arranged for. It came and we packed in. On
the back perched a boy who outsmelt any Serb we had ever found. It
seemed impossible that a human could so smell and yet live. Suddenly the
boy drew a packet from his pocket and the smell became intolerable. He
unwrapped a piece of cheese and, gasping for breath, we watched it
disappear. When it had gone we breathed more freely, but the odour still
clung to the youth, and we were not sorry when the auto pulled up at the
village of Plavnitza on the edge of the lake. A man, who said that he
had been sent to help us, dragged us to the telephone office. He worried
the instrument for a while and announced that the boat would be here in
two hours. It would have come earlier, but somehow they couldn't make
steam get up. We expected it to come in four, and so went off to get
something to eat.

The lake was very high, coming right up to the road. All the low fields
were covered with water as far as one could see. The girl at the inn was
shuddering and shivering with malaria, and we gave her some quinine. At
last the steamer came.

We had to pack into one of those cockhat boats, as the quay was
separated from the village by half a mile of water. When we got to the
steamer, the captain leaned over the side and shouted--

"Where are the mattresses?"

"What mattresses?" said the harbour-master.

"When are you going to start?" demanded we, clambering on board.

"When I get the mattresses," said the captain.

"But what mattresses?" replied the harbour-master.

"I was sent to get mattresses," said the captain, "and here I wait till
they come."

This was a nuisance, nobody had said anything about the mattresses.

"I shan't go till to-morrow anyhow," said the skipper.

"I think we'd all better go back to Podgoritza and come again
to-morrow," said the man in charge.

"We don't move from here," said Jo, firmly. "If he won't go we'll sit on
this boat--which was sent for us--and sing songs all night so that he
shan't sleep."

The captain refused to move without the mattresses and we refused to go
back, so a violent argument ensued. We remained adamant. At last in
despair the harbour master said that he would go and telephone. Night
was coming on, the deck was chilly, so Jan went to explore. The quay was
half under water, but by jumping from stone to stone one could get
about, and Jan discovered an entrance into the stone storehouse. The
door was boarded up, but he forced his way in, discovering a huge empty
interior banked up well above the water. At one end was a platform made
of boards on tubs. An ideal bed. He called the company and they arranged
themselves on the planks, though some were dismayed at the prospect of
getting no supper. The boards were loose and as each took his place they
bobbed up and down. Miss Brindley said that it seemed like sleeping on
the keyboard of a piano. We did not expect to see anything before
morning of the harbour-master or of Stajitch who had gone with him; but
just as we were settled and beginning to snore and the rats were running
about, Stajitch poked his head through the window and said that the boat
was going immediately. We reluctantly got up, for we were really rather
cosy, packed again and hopped in the moonlight from stone to stone till
we got to the ship--which was the same old Turkish gunboat on which we
had travelled once before. The thing was then explained--a telegraphic
mistake. The captain had been ordered to fetch the strangers: but
strangers and mattresses are only one letter different, "n" or "m," this
letter had been transposed.

Luckily it was a beautiful moonlight night. The lake was wonderfully
romantic. A fat Serbian captain, who seemed to know Stajitch, made a
request. He said that he had been cut off from his division, which was
at Monastir, and that he was going to try and rejoin them. He ask us if
he could join our party, as it would come cheaper at the hotels and he
could get transport.

It was pretty cold on the lake, but we wrapped ourselves in our blankets
and said the view was lovely. Hunger was also gnawing within us, so we
were glad when at last the rumbling old engines halted and the steamer
gave three hoots. We waited anxiously, and at last a large rowboat came
sideways against the steamer. Four carriages were waiting in the bazaar.
A very polite Montenegrin doctor welcomed us at the hotel and we got
some much desired food.

Bed was beginning to be a mere commonplace now, but we enjoyed it for
all that, and slept well into the morning.

Scutari wore its usual air of "the ballet" when we arose. The ladies
dressed all in their best clothes, and with great flowing veils and wide
skirted coats were hobbling to church. The shopkeepers, with their long
black and white legs and coloured shirts, were lounging about the low
counters of their shops, smoking and drinking coffee brought them (on
little swinging trays) by boys.

The British consul had taken up his quarters at the "Maison Piget." The
house was gated, as are all Albanian houses, but this gate was like an
old feudal portal. The doors were wonderfully carved and were opened by
our old friend the Wolf. We had thought him to be a servant of Suma's,
but it appeared that he belonged to the British Empire.

The house was crammed full of arms: a little cannon threatened us on the
stairway, swords, claymores, creeses, falchions, scimitars, glaives,
dirks, and yatagans were nailed on all the walls, and there were muskets
of every sort and size, heavy arquebuses from the north and gas-pipe
guns and Arab horsemen firelocks with polished stocks like the handle of
a corkscrew, all inlaid with gold, silver, and mother-of-pearl.

"Yes," said the consul, gazing reflectively, "he had a taste for
weapons. And also for old cookery books."

The consul said that he thought that there was a boat at San Giovanni.
We cheered, for our luck seemed to be holding, and while he went off to
the Italian consul we went to the governor to beg for transport. Neither
consul nor governor was in, but we caught the Italian consul in the
afternoon. He admitted that there was a boat, but warned us that it was
no nosegay. He said that two Frenchmen who had thought of taking it had
sent him back a telegram which had quite unnerved him.

"Et je n'ai jamais dit qu'elle était une Transatlantique," he said,
waving his arms.

He said that the archbishop had told him that a party of English had
come into the town last night, "en haillons," but that he had not
believed it possible. However, he had seen two of us in the street that
morning, and had realized that it was true.

We said that any boat would do. He warned us of the danger of
submarines.

At the consul's house we found the captain of the Miridites awaiting us.
He was a heavy-looking man with European clothes and a fez. After the
ceremonious coffee he made a set speech, saying that he was paying his
duties to the great British Empire, and that England was their only
hope. The consul sat rather wishing that he wouldn't, and that his
servant had said that he was not at home. In common with most of the
Christian rulers of Albania this gentleman seemed to have spent most of
his time in exile.

Returning to the hotel Jan found that Jo had been purchasing, and he
dragged her and Miss Brindley off to see the archbishop. The cathedral
still carries the scars of the first bombardment. The archbishop, a
large flat man, gave us each a hand as though he expected us to kiss it;
he had a huge archiepispocal ring and a lot of imperiosity. He seemed
more political than bishopy, though most of the Churchmen are; and there
is the tale of one who said, "I would rather people went to drill than
to church." There were a lot of wealthy looking Albanians sitting round
and being respectable. The archbishop spoke no French nor German, only
Italian. But Jan, with the help of a lot of old musical terms, and an
imperfectly forgotten Spanish, managed to convey to him some
intelligible compliments and sentences. We got out at last, and his
eminence accompanied us to the top of the stairs and gave us the
difficult problem of bowing backwards as we went down. This visit was
necessary, as we might have had to get a "Besa" from him if we meant to
go through to Durazzo.

The Serbian captain who had been on the Turkish gunboat met us in the
street. He dragged us into a café and began to order beer by the
half-dozen. He presented Jo with a small Turkish gold coin, which was
valued at five shillings, as a bribe to allow him to join our party. As
he already had permission it seemed superfluous.

Some of our party were still pretty seedy. Two had gone to a shop in
search of castor oil. A very old and withered chemist, who spoke bad
French, invited them in and asked for an account of their adventures,
interrupting them with explosions of "Ah poves, poves, poves, poves."
"Ah, poves, poves, poves, poves," between every incident and also at the
final request for the medicine. He showed them to the door and suddenly
burst into unexpected English.

"Good naite, vairey good. I am your poppa."

In the hotel café we found two French aeroplanists, for four had arrived
that day, sailing down over the city, to the great terror of the
inhabitants. They seemed to be afflicted with the same idea as "Quel
Pays."

"Ah, monsieur et dame," said they, "quel pays."

We asked them how things were.

"We have just come from Prizren. The Serbs are in a dreadful condition.
All the roads are covered with starving and dying people. The troops are
eating dead horses and roots. There have been violent snow blizzards all
over the mountains. We saw some of your people, too, doctors and nurses,
they were going off to Ipek, 'dans une condition déplorable.' We came
across the mountains; one of us is lost. Awful country, nowhere to land
if anything went wrong and one of our machines has not arrived. God
knows what has happened to them. The rest of us are all coming along on
foot. We burnt fifty motor cars yesterday, monsieur, that made a blaze."

We asked them what sort of a time they had had in Serbia; but much of
their answer is unpublishable.

"Each time we ascended every Serbian regiment fired at us. Once we came
down over a battalion and the whole lot fired volleys, and when we
landed and stood in front of our machine holding up our hands," they
pantomimed, "they continued to fire at us. Then they came and took us
prisoners, and were going to shoot us, although one of us had a military
medal. A schoolmaster recognised us as French and rescued us. Our
machine was broken; but we could get no transport and had to walk thirty
kilometres back to our base without food.

"Another time we were chasing an Austrian, the Serbian batteries fired
at us, monsieur, not at the enemy. Our officers had to send from the
aerodrome to tell them to stop."

As we were going to bed the Montenegrin doctor came in.

"I am sent by the governor, monsieur," said he. "We do not consider it
safe, this boat idea. Austrian submarines are everywhere, and the
governor would feel it as a personal responsibility if you were drowned.
We will provide carriages to Alessio and thence arrange horses--only one
day and a half on to Durazzo. Thence Essad Pasha will give you his motor
boat and you can easily get to Valona."

Our men groaned at the thought of more journeying. They were all
thoroughly fed up with the road, though personally we rather liked the
idea. We had heard that Durazzo was very interesting, and would have
liked to have met Essad, though we did not know just how his politics
were trending. We decided to see the Italian consul once more.

Next day we hunted up the mayor, Mahram Beg, a Turk, for he also could
give us a "Besa" if necessary. He was at last discovered, a little
crumpled looking man in an office. We were not allowed to interview him
in private, but a Montenegrin was there and all conversation had to
pass by him like through an imperfect telephone. We gave the mayor a
greeting from Colonel P----and little else. A very disappointing
interview.

Jan went off to see the governor, who received him kindly. He said that
he would arrange everything, but that it was difficult for him with the
Italian consul, as the Powers did not recognize the Montenegrin
occupation.

"You see, monsieur, here I am the law, and yet the law does not
recognize me."

The Italian assured us that the Montenegrins were wrong, and that of
course the boat would be escorted, and the danger reduced to its least
possible amount. Just after we had left him we heard two things which
made us jump.

A body of English officers had landed at Medua, and ninety English
refugees from Serbia were _en route_ for Scutari. Could we not catch the
transport and at the same time leave room for the others? Suma came in,
and we consulted him. He was doubtful if the horses could be got at
Alessio for us.

"You see, it is Albania and not Montenegro," he repeated.

We accordingly hunted up the doctor. He promised us horses for the
morrow. The carriages had all gone to fetch the English officers. We
asked him about Alessio, and he assured us that the telephone message
had been received saying that they were waiting. We asked him several
times until he grew angry and said--

"Do you doubt my honour, then?"

Before we went to bed the hotel proprietor came to us.

"Do you pay or the Government?" asked he; and seemed very relieved when
we told him that we paid. The Montenegrins are neither loved nor trusted
here.

The next morning the horses came, but very late. In the crowd watching
our departure was an old Albanian without a moustache. That was a
strange sight; we looked harder. It was a woman. She must have been one
of those who had sworn eternal virginity, and so achieve all a man's
privileges, even eating with them instead of getting the scraps left
over from the meal. But the punishment of death awaited her if she
failed her vow. Here was one, chuckling and grinning at some of us in
our attempts to mount the weird saddles and weirder steeds which had
been provided. The Serb captain had a carriage, and another carriage
took all our baggage, which had now sadly dwindled owing to the
continued depredations of the police. We straggled out of the town and
through the crowded bazaar, for it was a Saturday. Passed the Venetian
fort and the river from which stuck the funnel of the steamer so
mysteriously sunk one night. We had heard that the Turkish gun flat
which had transported us had burst her boilers, so now the Montenegrins
had no steamers left.

The road was level and better than many we had come over, though once or
twice the carriages were hopelessly mired, and had to be pushed across.
West's horse had ideas about side streets, and bolted down each as he
came to it.

We met the Adriatic Commission. Mr. Lamb and Mr. George Paget, returning
after so long an absence, were in the first carriage. We recognized Mr.
Paget at once, for though either of them might have liked old arms, only
one would have collected old cookery books. The rest of the commission
came along later. They stopped us. We expected questions about the
Serbs; but no. They said--

"Can one buy underclothing in Scutari?"

Their baggage transport had been sunk by an Austrian submarine and they
had only what they were wearing. We wished each other luck and went on.
There was no hope of arriving at Alessio that night, we had started too
late. As evening was falling, we came to an Albanian inn and decided to
put up.

There was a stable full of manure on the ground floor, through which one
had to pass, and in the dark one was continually slipping into the
midden or running one's head unexpectedly into horses' hindquarters. Up
a rickety stair were two rooms. The floor rocked as we walked over it,
and every moment we expected to go through and be precipitated into the
manure below. The walls and floor were so loosely made that the wind
blew through in all directions, and we called it the "castle in the
air." We supped on chickens which we had brought from Scutari, and
Whatmough and Elmer made a fire in the yard and got us cocoa. By this
time we were all getting fed up with romantic surroundings, and wanted
something more solid. The swarthy countenances about the bonfire, the
queer costumes in the flickering fire, left us unmoved.

Sleep was impossible. The wind caught one in every corner, threatening
lumbago. Stajitch fled and camped outside in one of the carriages,
despite the rain.

[Illustration: ALBANIAN MULE DRIVERS CAMPING.]

We started as early as possible--dawn. Whatmough, Cutting, Jo and Jan
lost the road, but were eventually rescued by a policeman. About eleven
one of the carriages broke down, and we had to repair it with tree and
wire. Here the houses were again like fortresses, and everybody
stared at us as though we came from the moon.

We reached the bank opposite Alessio--a small Turkish-looking village
divided between a mud-bank and a hillside. We were about to turn over
the bridge when news was brought that a motor-boat belonging to Essad
was in San Giovanni harbour. We sent a policeman galloping on to stop
it, and followed as fast as our meagre horses would allow. We also heard
that a submarine had been in the port the day before and had tried to
torpedo the ships lying there--but had missed.

We cantered on, pressing along a stony road which was almost level with
the salt marshes on either side. San Giovanni appeared after about an
hour and a half. We rode down on to the beach. The motor-boat was
getting up anchor. We yelled to the skipper, but he understood no Serb;
so we translated through a Turk who was lounging about. The skipper said
that he could not embark us there as it was Montenegrin territory, but
that if we would go back to Alessio he would wait for us at the mouth of
the river and take us down that very night. This seemed too good to be
true and we hurried back, passing an Austrian torpedo which had run up
on the brown sand--a present from yesterday's raid. We turned the others
and cantered ahead to get a boat; reached the bridge once more and
crossed into Albania. Officials ran from all sides to stop us, but we
ignored them, dismounted, and ran to the side of the river where boats
were loading, overloading with passengers. The boatmen refused to take
us if we had no passes from the governor.

We hunted the governor's office up the hillside, panting in our haste.
We burst in upon him. He was a dirty man in an unclean shirt and unkempt
trousers.

"We want to go by the motor-boat," we explained.

"Who are you?" he asked, picking his teeth.

"We are the English about whom the governor of Scutari has telegraphed."

"I don't know anything about you," he said. His manner was ungracious.

"But," we said, "they assured us that they had telegraphed from
Scutari."

The telegraph clerk was brought, and denied that any message had come.

"Anyhow," said the governor, "the motor-boat is for Albanian soldiers
only, and has gone twenty minutes ago. I can do nothing for you without
authority from Durazzo."

We wandered dismally back through the town and were immediately
arrested by the bridge officials because we had not paid the toll rates.
We paid double to get rid of them.

We found an inn. It was the usual sort of building only of stone, and so
dirtier than the others. Some travelling show seemed to have left its
scenery in lieu of its bill, for bits of painted canvas did duty as
partitions.

There was a room with six beds, but one was reserved for an Albanian
officer. We took the rest. We loitered about all the afternoon, and in
the evening the Albanian officer came in. He was a beaky-faced,
unpleasant-looking man, but he procured us some bread, which we sorely
lacked. The hotel had little food, so we gave them our rice. By this
time fleas had got into it, and seeming to like it had bred in
quantities. Still as we had nothing else it had to be cooked, and we
picked out the boiled fleas as well as we were able. The Serbian captain
started drinking with the Albanian, and soon both were well over the
edge of sobriety.

They came up long after we had turned in, fell over Cutting, who cursed
them without stint, and tumbled on to the beds which we had left for
them. The Albanian made some remarks about the ladies, which from the
tone were insults; but we were unable to chastize him, or we should all
have been put into prison.

They snored and coughed all night, and spat about in the dark. Those who
were sleeping near cowered beneath the mackintosh sheets and prayed for
luck. But in the morning we found that they had been spitting on the
wall.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XXIV

"ONE MORE RIBBER TO CROSS"


The Mayor of Alessio had said that there were lots of horses, if we had
Essad's permission; but the Turkish captain said that there were none,
only at San Giovanni were they to be found. It was pelting with rain,
but Blease and we decided to walk over to explore for ourselves. Jan
first wrote a very stiff letter to the Governor of Scutari about the
non-arrival of the telegram, and off we went, having borrowed oilskins
and sou'westers. The Serb captain insisted on coming with us.

In half an hour the storm had made the stony road into a series of deep
ponds which nearly joined each other, so Jo tucked her now ragged skirt
into a bright woven Serbian belt and walked along with the water
streaming from coat to boots. It became rather a pleasure to splash
through ten-inch deep puddles, knowing that one could not possibly get
any wetter, and this joy was intensified by the knowledge that the
Serbian captain was being soaked and didn't like it.

San Giovanni consists of a series of huts, each like Burns' birthplace,
grouped on the shelving side of a stony cliff. The bay itself is
semi-circular, with a long cape jutting out to the south, the extremity
of which almost always is floating in the air, owing to the mirage. In
the bay were two rusty steamers--one the _Benedetto_, which had been
promised to us by the Italian governor--several old wooden sailers, and
a lot of smallish fishing smacks very brightly painted and with raised
poop and prow. A group of Albanians were toiling at sacks which cumbered
the little wooden jetty.

We immediately hunted out Captain Fabiano, the Italian commander of the
wireless telegraph, and found him in a little house at the northern horn
of the bay. He received us gaily. He spoke an excellent French, so that
the Serbian captain could not butt in and interfere, as was his habit.
Fabiano said that it would take a long time to get a wire to Brindisi,
where we had heard were several ships of the English fleet, very bored
and craving for something to do; we had hoped to get into communication
with them. Then Jan had a brain wave.

"Is not the wind good for Durazzo?" asked he.

"Splendid," said Fabiano, "and no submarines to-day."

"Could we not get a fishing boat?"

"I will send and see."

While we were waiting he told us that he was sheltering the crew of the
ship which had been transporting the English mission's kit. The captain
of the little transport had set fire to the benzine which his boat was
carrying, which act so enraged the submarine captain that he fired three
torpedoes into her, and afterwards mounted his conning tower and fired
ten full clips from his revolver at the swimming men. Luckily revolver
shooting requires much practice. The men had clung to an overturned boat
and had all eventually reached shore, after which they had to march a
day and a half without boots or food, often fording rivers which came to
their waists. Fabiano said that he was going to send them home on the
_Benedetto_.

The captain of the port sent back word that we could have a boat
immediately--much to Fabiano's surprise. But most of the party were at
Alessio. We hurried off to see the captain of the port. Explanations,
certainly when the luggage came; and off went Jan with a guide to get
pack ponies. Halfway back to Alessio was the stable, but the steeds were
not ready, so Jan was ushered up into a top room where was a huge fire,
over which an Albanian was stewing a cormorant with all its feathers on.
There were other Albanians and a very old Montenegrin soldier. He
admired everything English, even Jan's tobacco which he had bought in
Pod.

We got to Alessio and packed everything hurriedly, paid the bill, tipped
an old soldier two dinars, and off. As we passed over the bridge the
clerk came running behind us. We had not paid the bridge fees, he said.

"How much?" asked Jan.

He hesitated.

"Two dinars," said he. He had been talking to the soldier.

Meanwhile Jo and Blease had found refuge in the house of the military
commandant. It was a hovel like all the houses, but they were given a
huge log fire which was built on the mud floor. Their stockings were
soon hanging on a line above the blaze, and their shins were scorching,
while they drank wonderful liqueur which was hospitably poured out by
the beautiful old host.

Turkish coffee was prepared for them by a soldier in a bursting French
fireman's uniform.

The captain's fire was the rendezvous of the village. Amiable and
picturesque people came in and talked about the unhealthiness of the
place, the relative bravery of nations with a special reference to the
courage of Montenegrins, and about the submarine raid and of how the
Austrian captain had repeatedly fired his revolver at the sailors of
the boat he had sunk while they were swimming in the water. Their eyes
were streaming, not with emotion, but because in Montenegro one has no
chimneys.

At dusk the rest of us arrived. The port captain said "To-morrow," so we
climbed up to the inn, examined the stores, a few tins of tunny,
mackerel, and milk, and the thirteen made the best of the bar-room floor
for the night, booted and ready in case a transport for the _Benedetto_
should arrive.

In the morning the captain said we could have the boat that night, and
in the evening he said we could have it in the morning. His excuse was
that the Borra was blowing its hardest, and no sailor could be found to
venture out; but Fabiano said that this was not true.

The real reason was the sleek Austrian torpedo lying on the beach, for
the Dulcinos are famed on the Adriatic coast because of their timidity.

Time passed drearily. The only amusement we had was to go and annoy the
captain of the port by asking when we could have a boat. The wind was
too cold for constitutionals, and we piled on all our clothes and sat on
our knapsacks in the bar-room--for there was no fire--and talked
wistfully of sausages, Yorkshire Relish and underdone beefsteaks.

We had much time for meditation, and pondered over the downfall of
Serbia. Why had the Serbian Government so resolutely refused to make any
territorial concessions to Bulgaria, when it was obvious that the entry
of Bulgaria into the conflict meant the ruin of Serbia? Why had they
permitted the Austrians to build their big gun emplacements on the
Danube without interruption? Why had they not withdrawn to the hills and
then built proper defences with barbed wire entanglements and
labyrinths? for properly entrenched they might have defied the
Austro-German forces for months. Some day, perhaps, these questions may
have to be answered.

One day a party came in. They had passed through Vrntze much later than
we, and we heard that Dr. Berry and an assistant had been seen hurriedly
nailing boards on to the slaughter-house roof. They, too, had come by
the Novi Bazar route. They said that the other routes were deep in snow
and that the sufferings of the army were terrible. That a great portion
had been hemmed in at Prizren, and that the Bulgars had shelled the
passes so that they could not escape. They themselves had escaped the
advancing Austrians by the skin of their teeth owing to good horses.

[Illustration: UNLOADING THE "BENEDETTO," SAN GIOVANNI DI MEDUA.]

The snow came down, driving along the valleys and whitening all the
hills; the cold grew more intense, and the desire for English beefsteaks
became an obsession: one talked of little else--or of Christmas. Food
was becoming scarce. The tinned mackerel was diminishing; some days we
had no bread. We walked once as far as Fabiano's wireless. The men were
living in a shed made of wattle, and the Borra whistled through the
cracks. There was a stove round which we sat while the men gave us tea;
but the warmth it induced in one's face only intensified the feeling of
cold on the back. Outside in the snow was a long-distance telescope, and
peering through one could see the conning tower of the Austrian
submarine, a faint hump on the sea by the southernmost point. As we
returned to the cold hotel we passed the Montenegrin batteries: cannon
too small to be of any use and the gunners of which were all so ill that
they could not handle them.

Two Frenchmen had been in San Giovanni for ten days, and their anxiety
to go was up to fever point. They took it in turns to stand "pour
observer," wrapped up to their noses, in a doorway, watching the
_Benedetto_ in case she should give them the slip. We called them
Tweedledum and Tweedledee.

One night somebody rushed up to their room. Booted, they jumped out of
bed, and ran about overhead. We thirteen scrambled up and intercepted
them between the stairs and the door. "Pour observer, steam-funnel,"
they shouted, and disappeared into the night, followed by their valet
with two hold-alls. They soon came back, very cold, and announced that
steam had been seen issuing from the _Benedetto's_ funnel. They had
rushed to it in an open boat, and had learnt that the _Benedetto_ was
ordered to be in readiness. She fumed quietly for three days, and then
was commandeered by the Serbian Government.

One day we saw a French aeroplane, an old friend of ours. Immediately
every one working in the port tore up hill, men jumped off the big boats
into little ones and rowed like a cinematograph turned double speed.

The commandant roared reassuringly from his attic window, and an officer
tried to beat the men back. Seeing us convulsed with laughter, they
turned sheepishly; but the little boats wagged on, people jumping into
the water as they neared shore.

"Come and sit round my fire," said the commandant. So we again imbibed
coffee and discussed courage. It was explained to us that none of the
men in the boats were Montenegrins, and we politely agreed.

Hearing that a Red Cross party was in the village people came and asked
for medical aid. We explained that we had no doctors, but they begged
us to come and see the invalids.

Doctors and chemists were unobtainable, and soldiers were dying every
day.

We had no hesitation in tackling the Montenegrin soldiers, for at least
we could do no harm, considering that our whole pharmacopœia was a
little boracic, some bismuth capsules, Epsom salts, quinine, iodine, and
one of the party owned a bottle of some patent unknown stuff, against
fever and many other ailments.

We were first taken to the barracks in the evening, scrambling up a
stony hill. The building looked like the disreputable ruins of
somebody's "Folly." Half the roof was off, and the walls were full of
holes. We stumbled up some black steps and entered a huge dark barn with
four log fires down the centre of the room.

Round these were huddled crowds of men. They pulled some rough planks
out of a hole in the wall to let in the sunset light, and the icy Borra
rushed in, playing with the smoke and setting the men to coughing. Here
and there on the ground were long mounds, covered completely with rough
hand-woven rugs. These were the invalids, who moaned as the rugs were
pulled off their faces. A great many had malaria; others had, as far as
we could see, very bad pleurisy; and one old Albanian with rattling
breath was huddled up in a far corner, too miserable to speak.

Whatmough sent for a dribble of camphorated oil he had stored in his
knapsack, "to cheer them up," said he, and rubbed everybody who had pain
and a cough.

"Give them hot drinks," said Jo, in a large way. "Milk or--"

"Milk! There is no milk in Medua," said the sergeant.

"No tinned milk--eggs to be bought?"

"Nothing, no meat; we have not even enough bread, and that is all we
get."

Very depressed, we sent them the remains of our Bovril and some tins of
milk from the tiny hotel store, and bought the last three eggs in the
place.

"Can't you send for more?" we asked.

"The hens are five hours away," said the proprietor, and didn't see why
he should send for eggs even if we paid heavily for them. He had
malaria--and nothing mattered.

We saw our patients daily, and the ones who weren't going to die got a
little better, so this made our reputation. People poured in from the
hills around, and we were much embarrassed. Our white-lipped waiter
confided to each member of the party that he had a lump on his knee.

Every one became very busy and put off looking at it. We discussed it.

What could a lump on the knee be which did not make a busy waiter limp?
And what on earth could we do for him when he wouldn't rest, and we were
reduced to boracic powder and bismuth capsules? We gave him a tube of
quinine, though, for his next attack of malaria.

The longer we rested in San Giovanni the more hopeless seemed the chance
of getting away from it. The Serbian Government was close on our heels,
and once they caught us up, there would be little left for us. That
evening we were sitting with the Frenchmen, it was Monday. They, too,
were depressed, and at last Tweedledum said--

"We shall never reach Paris, we shall be here for ever and ever."

"Oh," said Jan, rashly, "I think we ought to be home in a week."

Dum put on the superior French air, which is aggravating even in a nice
man.

"Vous croyez?" he said.

"I'll bet on it," said Jan.

"A dinner," answered Dum.

"Good," said Jan.

This lent a new interest to life.

The very next day the Frenchmen told us that the Serb Government had
arrived at Scutari; the Montenegrin Governor had telegraphed to
commandeer and keep back the _Benedetto_. We had been forgotten, and the
French boat was to leave at dawn under escort.

She had been strictly forbidden by her owners to take passengers, but
the Frenchmen had arranged through their minister to go by that boat if
she left the first.

Telegraphic communication with the English minister at Cettinje was
practically impossible; the only thing was to appeal to the captain.
First we rushed up the hill, and interviewed Captain Fabiano, who had
already made various efforts to get us off. He promised to try and
influence the French captain.

Then we flung ourselves into a boat and made for the little steamer.
People were looking at something with opera glasses, and our boatmen
took fright and wanted to row straight for land. Jan cursed them so
much, however, that they began to fear us more than imaginary submarines
or aeroplanes, and brought us alongside the vessel.

The captain was ashore, taking a walk; the crew very sympathetically
made contradictory suggestions as to his whereabouts.

At last we caught him. He was nice, but had strict orders, he said, to
take no one.

"But, monsieur," we said, "if we were swimming in the sea, or cast off
on a desert island, you would rescue us."

He admitted it.

"Well, what is the difference? Here we cannot get away; the food is
growing less and less."

He objected that he had no boats, and no life-saving apparatus.

"That is nothing. We must get away from here. We will give you a paper
saying that it is on our own responsibility. In this country one cannot
telegraph, the telegrams never arrive. You know the Balkans."

He smiled.

"Oui, oui, c'est un pays où le Bon Dieu n'a pas passé, ou au moins il a
peut-être passé en aeroplane."

At last he agreed to take us if we could get a letter from Fabiano, and
so take the responsibility from his shoulders. This we got. Fabiano said
"Au revoir, bon voyage" for the fifth time, and at dawn we got a call,
and quitted the bar-room floor for ever. Fabiano wished us "bon voyage"
for the sixth time in the chilly dawn, and we embarked.

The mate, a little round man, greeted us, and in the moments when they
were not rushing about with ropes and chains the cook explained the
Austrian submarine attack.

"You see, monsieur et dame," said he, "they came in over there. The
_Benedetto_ was lying outside of that sandbank, and that is the torpedo
which is lying on the beach. The one aimed at us came straight, one
could see the whorls of the water coming straight at us, but it just
tipped the sandbank and dived underneath our keel. It stuck in the mud
then, and the water boiled over it for a long while."

The mate cut one of the anchors because they were afraid of fouling the
sunken torpedo, and we steamed slowly out from the shelter of the
sandbank.

No escort was visible, and soon the sailors began to look anxious. They
scanned the horizon anxiously. At last one cried, "There she is." Far
away against the western dawn could be seen a thin needle mark of smoke.
In half an hour we were quite close, an Italian destroyer was convoying
a small steamer. The destroyer swung round under our stern, while the
steamer, its funnels set back, raced for San Giovanni looking like a
frightened puppy tearing towards home. The grey warship surged past us,
and out towards the horizon once more, our captain shouting to them that
he could get to Brindisi by midnight. Far away on the sky-line could be
seen the three funnels of a cruiser.

We breakfasted on tinned mackerel, an unlucky dish. The _Harmonie_,
empty of cargo, was like an eggshell in the water. She bounced and
rolled and bounded from wave to wave, half of the time her screw out of
the water. The breakfast did not nourish many. Far on the horizon could
be seen the destroyer and the cruiser sweeping in gigantic circles.

Half a kilometre away a periscope suddenly appeared, then the submarine
dived, rose once more, showing the rounded conning tower, dived, rose
again, like a porpoise at play.

"See," cried the sailors, "how well are we guarded. Outermost the
cruiser, then the destroyer, and innermost the submarine." The cruiser
and destroyer took big sweeps once more and steamed off behind us
towards Cattaro.

Our boat rolled its way from dawn to dusk. We sought refuge in the coal
hole, some lay down in the little officers' cabin. After dark the sea
grew more rough, and splashing over the deck drove even the most ill to
find shelter. Whatmough staggered to the companion, tripped over
something, and fell the length of the stair accompanied by a hard object
which hit him and made hissing sounds like a bicycle pump. He was too
seasick to investigate, but next morning found the ship's tortoise lying
on its back and feebly waving its feet and head.

Then the engines slowly ceased, and there was silence. What had
happened? The steamer gave four timid hoots. The people in the cabin lay
in the darkness wondering if they had broken down, for it was not nearly
midnight. At last the mate came in.

"Why, you're all in the dark," he said.

Some one asked, "When shall we get to Brindisi?"

"We're there," said the mate.

The steamer rocked on the sea, waiting for an escort through the mine
field, lights were sparkling in the distance, and now and then
flashlights cut the dark blue of the sky. Great black ships surged by in
the gloom, ships with insistent queries as to who we were and whence we
came.

At last an escort came: we were berthed and lay about waiting for the
dawn.

Long after day came the doctor, who passed us, and we stepped ashore
saying--

"Thank God we are back in Europe once again."

Two days later San Giovanni was bombarded by an Austrian cruiser, and
all the shipping was sunk, _Benedetto_ and all.

We were heartily welcomed in Brindisi by the English colony, and at the
consul's office learned that the submarine was an Austrian, and that the
cruiser had made the sweep to chase it away. Jo, Miss Brindley, and Jan
went to Rome, where they ere feasted by more English, while at
Milan--where the rest of the party spent the night--a whole theatre
stood and cheered them when they came in.

Jan won his bet by four minutes.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: Route Map of the Authors' Wanderings]




INDEX


Albania, 109, 154, 185

Alessio, 351, 355-359, 362

Andrievitza, 126, 128, 133, 326


Belgrade, 228, 229

Berane, 114, 291, 294, 295, 326

Brindisi, 360, 374


Cattaro, 94, 156

Cettinje, 48, 64, 78, 85, 91, 92, 96, 121, 123, 139, 205, 297, 336, 337

Chabatz, 229

Chainitza, 42, 49, 52, 53, 66


Danilograd, 87

Dechani, 147, 152, 157, 158, 190

Dormitor Mountains, 64, 74, 75

Dreina, 57

Durazzo, 350, 356, 360


Ebar River, 250, 267, 268


Gorazhda, 57, 59

Gotch, 236

Gussigne, 122


Ipek, 114, 122, 124, 132, 134, 143, 144, 145, 154, 175, 294, 330


Jabliak, 64, 70, 74

Jabooka, 129, 131, 330, 331

Jakovitza, 114


Kolashin, 132

Kossovo, 176, 178

Krag, Kragujevatz, 198, 209, 212, 213, 223, 224, 238, 243, 252, 262,
                   280, 330

Kralievo, 213, 241, 242, 262, 282

Krusevatz, 7, 24, 25, 194, 196, 237, 241


Lapovo, 259

Liéva Riéka, 134, 327, 334

Lim River, 36


Macedonia, 154, 184, 185

Metalka, 51

Mitrovitza, 155, 175, 176, 255, 261, 262, 275, 280, 288, 291, 292, 298

Morava, 1


Negbina, 35

Nickshitch, 66, 80, 83

Nish, 10-14, 20, 21, 40, 190, 235, 236, 275, 279

Novi Bazar, 68, 230, 239, 262, 275, 280, 284, 288, 292, 294

Novi Varosh, 33, 35, 36


Obrenovatz, 228


Plavnitza, 107, 116, 341

Plevlie, 38, 41, 43, 62, 72, 77, 80, 114, 165, 171, 294

Plav, 122

Pod, Podgoritza, 64, 85, 88, 89, 90, 101, 124, 125, 127, 189, 326, 328,
                 335, 339

Posheravatz, 229

Prepolji, 36, 37, 54

Prizren, 349


Rashka, 257, 259, 265, 275, 279, 300, 308

Rieka, 99, 124

Rudnik, 172, 223


Salonika, 15-17, 20, 44, 46, 190, 193

San Giovanni di Medua, 346, 351, 355, 360

Sanjak, 87, 96, 114, 154, 294

Soutari, 76, 84, 92, 94, 97, 101, 105, 107, 108, 110, 112, 113, 114,
         122, 147, 217, 275, 326, 344

Shavnik, 76, 84

Shar Dagh, 180

Sofia, 64

Studenitza, 249, 278


Tara, 68

Tarabosch, 103

Trsternick, 25

Tutigne, 295, 299, 303, 304


Uskub, 14, 18, 180, 182, 183, 184, 186, 225, 238, 275, 288, 291

Uzhitze, 1, 3, 27, 28, 38, 40, 48, 277


Valievo, 295

Vela, 236

Velika, 137

Virbazar, 117

Voinik Mountains, 75

Vranje, 235, 236

Vrbitza, 319

Vrnjatchka Banja, Vrntze, 2, 18, 26, 27, 190, 194, 196, 198, 227,
                          245, 261


Zaichar, 13, 236

Zlatibor, 31, 33


THE END

PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BECCLES.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Luck of Thirteen, by Jan Gordon
Cora J. Gordon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LUCK OF THIRTEEN ***

***** This file should be named 17291-0.txt or 17291-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/2/9/17291/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Taavi Kalju and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net. (This file was made using scans of
public domain works from the University of Michigan Digital
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
